Just let everyone file in and then we'll wrap into it.
Alright, well, good afternoon, minister.
Welcome along to the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee for this afternoon's hearing
on Vote Customs.
Uh, we have an hour set down for today's hearing.
We will hand over to you for some introductory comments,
and then I'm sure there'll be a range of questions.
Thank you very much. I'd first like
to acknowledge the customs officials here today
to help me in this role, but thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I think just to set the scene, um, customs,
as you know, um, is responsible for the collection
of revenue supporting trade, protecting our border,
and facilitating travel.
So they are a very busy unit.
Um, I'll briefly comment on a couple
of areas I'm sure the committee will want to ask more about.
Um, first of all, customs is stopping an unprecedented
quantity of illegal drugs nearly five tons
in the past 12 months.
Over the past 10 years, seizures
of methamphetamine have increased nearly tenfold to
around 2,500 kilograms in 2024 calendar year.
The pattern is just as stark when looking at interceptions
of meth destined for New Zealand offshore seizures have gone
from 10 kilograms in 2016 to
around 2,300 kilograms last year.
Cocaine seizures are smaller in scale compared
to methamphetamine, but have significantly
increased in recent years.
Just last month, customs seized almost 300 kilograms
of cocaine of two ships that arrived at the port
of toga via Panama.
These patterns are part of the context
for the government supporting customs
with an extra 35 million in this year's budget,
this will target more offenders involved in smaller
to medium quantity, high frequency drug smuggling,
who we know aspire to be the big players in the future.
The funding also aims to boost the ability to identify
and prosecute those trusted insiders who use their access
and ports or airports to facilitate criminal activity
and will allow customs
to put additional effort into helping raise awareness
with the private sector partners
and build a broader response to organized crime.
The extra money will also fund an additional overseas
customs liaison officer adding to the agency's network
of international intelligence sharing capabilities
that help stop drugs reaching New Zealand.
A lot of work is going on
around improving the broader government response
to transnational serious and organized crime
and customs is providing the secretariat support
to the trans transnational
and serious organized Crime Ministerial Advisory Group,
which I'm happy to discuss later.
While border protection is understandably a major focus,
there are other significant pieces of work underway.
One of the most important of these is the review
of customs fees to recover the cost of managing
and processing goods across our border.
Changes being made to these fees
and the structure of the fees regime will ensure costs are
recovered more fairly sustainably,
and remove taxpayer subsidization.
New rates for goods management fees will take effect from
one July with structural changes happening from
one April next year.
Another piece of work in the area of customs trade,
which is happening towards the end of this year,
is a new time release survey
that measures customs clearance times for goods.
The last survey was carried out in 2023
and showed customs cleared nearly 94%
of sea cargo containers before arrival in New Zealand.
Over 78%
of air cargo imports entries were cleared before arrival.
Reflecting the much shorter time,
time travels or air freight.
A hundred percent of air cargo exports were cleared
before leaving New Zealand.
One more example of the high quality service customs
delivers and its commitment to protecting, um, commitment
to protect and promote New Zealand's interests across the
borders, whether to take any questions.
Excellent. Thank you Council.
Jenny Solicitor minister,
your ministerial advisory group on transnational, um,
serious and organized crime.
We've, uh, seen three reports March, April, and may.
They describe a customs border system that is overwhelmed
by record drug imports.
You and your, um, your opening statements actually talked
about the huge, uh, drugs that customs have seized,
but we also see corruption, according to your ministerial,
uh, advisory group's report, insider threats
failed interagency coordination.
Do you accept that under your leadership New Zealand is
losing the fight against transnational organized crime?
And if not, why?
I I think I'd put some, um, context
around the commentary from the reports.
Sure. Excuse me. The Ministerial Advisory Group was tasked
to be bold to be, um, an analytical in its approach.
Um, we have, um,
and I think if you put the reports in context
around the challenges that we are facing,
it is not talking about customs failing.
It's talking about New Zealand's response
overall in the world's climate.
So I think that's, um, important to make that context.
The part that the, uh, the group is focused on is
how do the agencies connect together better?
How do they work more cooperatively and what more can we do?
I think the report fairly reflects the incredible
work policing customs are doing.
How we are seizing more than we've ever seized before.
What we are focused on is who the enemy is,
which is the international organized criminal cartels
that are targeting New Zealand, and
therefore the focus of the group is what do we
as a country do to be better at it?
And so I would strongly defend the fact
that we are not delivering.
I think we can name numerous operations that the customs
and police and other agencies have done.
What we know is we can do more and we can do better.
And from my position,
I believe New Zealand should be the very best in the world
at this because we have the advantage of a single border.
We have a geographic isolation,
we have a single enforcement agencies,
we have a single jurisdiction.
So therefore, how we connect up and what we do,
and that's what the ministerial Advisory Group has been set
up to do, is to challenge what we're doing now, analyze
what we're doing now, and identify what we can do better.
Supplementary Mr. Chair, um, let me reframe the question.
I wasn't actually pointing the finger at customs.
The organization failing, um,
may merely pointing out
that ministerial advisory group is just
that it provides advice,
but the person with ministerial mandate to act
minister is yourself.
So when we look at your March report, um, one
of the graphs actually that the March report has
basically gives us the picture that meth amphetamine use
as per the wastewater, has increased over the last year
by nearly a hundred percent.
So why is it that even though there are all these drugs
being seized, we see from the wastewater, um, usage of,
of people in New Zealand, it's actually doubled.
Doesn't that mean that actually the border is not as safe
and secure as it should be Minister,
which is one of your core roles?
No, I would say that the border is,
we can always improve, we can do better.
The consumption component
that you're talking about is there's, as you know,
customs protects the border,
the consumption component is at a police level in terms of,
you know, the enforcement of, um, the usage and possession
and in the community level.
And there's a, um, um, a number of initiatives that happen,
including the resilience, organized crime and communities.
Since we started to become aware of the wastewater results.
Um, customs responded very quickly.
Um, the budget 2025 bid, as you can appreciate,
commenced last year.
Um, as you know, the timing of those budget bids, we also,
um, commenced work on the border security bill,
which is coming through and being developed at the moment.
So there was a significant amount of work in
how we can do things within customs to strengthen.
Um, we worked on a number of relationships with the ports.
We, um, launched, um, the purchase program
with Navy to purchase the, um, UNC crewed surface vessel
and started exploring UNC crewed air vessels with the, um,
view of strengthening our water response.
Um, I think that from the moment
that we became aware there was some issues,
and that's on top of the already very vigilant work.
And as I've said, you know, 10 years ago we were seizing,
um, 55 kilograms of methamphetamine in a year.
Last year we seized 90 kilograms of meth a week.
So I think that we have an exemplary force,
but it does tell us that there is more we can do.
And we're having a very frank
and honest conversation with all of the agencies about
what more we can do to reduce that impact.
There is always more that you can do minister,
but one of the things that we know, um, in terms
of the staff who are at the border in terms
of the effect of some of those cuts, we're actually seeing
the staff cuts that have been confirmed is about 79 people
right at customs.
Um, but the numbers are actually worse than that
because the numbers I've got back
through from written questions is that there's been 120
positions disestablished at customs.
And if you add on the unfilled positions, which is 111
positions, and you then look at this graph
of methamphetamine
and went when it went up in terms of construction,
you could basically see when there is a correlation
between this meth use
and over 200 staff
of customs not actually being their minister.
So yes, you have a ministerial advisory group
that is there now actually to actually advise you,
but minister, you have the role as the minister
to act instead of just waiting
for the ministerial advisory group
to give you recommendations.
And, and as I've said, um, you minister chair
that I can acknowledge that we have acted.
Um, I can go through all of the, um, operations
that we are currently doing, the initiatives
that we have driven from a customs perspective.
Um, further to that is that as we responded in all
of the written questions, no frontline positions
that are involved in the direct enforcement
and control of our border.
We are disestablished. In fact,
we've had significant investment in technology.
We've had significant investment in the capacity
that customs has to respond,
including our international relationships, including the,
the intelligence gathering and analytics.
As you've seen, we've opened the new, um,
the new NZ post open, the new, um, mail center
and, um, mail for data.
Uh, data for mail has been a project of great, um,
success in terms of being able to analyze a lot more
as what's coming in the border.
So because of those technology advancements,
because of the way that we are using information,
we have been able to be a good agency in terms
of reducing surplus staff
and redirecting that energy into the frontline staff,
as you've suggested we needed to do
to strengthen that order.
So those positions,
although just established, did not alter our capacity
to control the border.
And in fact, our visibility
to control the border has been strengthened.
Okay. We have supplementary questions from Tim Costley,
Hernandez and Laura McClure start.
Tim. Thanks Mr. Chair. Thank you, Vanessa.
I'm quite extraordinary. Really.
I trying to, I,
I want come back to the first question, though.
It seems like the member has backpedaled dramatically from
it, from what I took as a, a massive criticism
of custom stuff, actually, I think,
and I just want have recorded now that your,
your staff are on the board are doing an amazing job.
We've seen some record, um,
and things over the last couple of years.
And I, I just, for, for those
that actually put on the uniform, we can airports, our ports
that are out at sea combating this stuff.
I just wanna, uh, record now a a vote
of thanks at least from one side of the table here.
'cause we appreciate what the work that they do.
Um, and we have seen some,
some great results as I referred to.
But, but, but I wanna reflect on the original question,
which was the, the ministerial advisory, um, panel
that you had set up and these issues, which, I mean,
in one sense it's great that they've been identified now
because now you can have a work plan,
but did they just pop up overnight
or were they actually the issues that were there prior
to the last election as well just
ticking along blind? Yeah,
I think that's, that's a, um, a part of, um,
the reason why the work is so important.
I think it, um, as we worked through and,
and full acknowledgement
to the expertise within the advisory group,
they all are very experienced in their own, um,
fields of expertise.
But they, um, it is this,
the way in which government has really responded
in an enforcement process.
Customs and Police over a number
of years have been probably the leaders in
that cooperative relationship.
Customs has been, um, you know, really grateful for the role
with defense, but as we've seen,
there's a lot more we can do
to strengthen that relationship.
So I think over time we have, um,
and that's part of what the advisory group is saying.
We, we have tended to operate very siloed.
Um, so IRD does their part, immigration does their part,
police does their part, custom does their part.
What we want to see now is how that cohesion works.
And in our response to organized crime, we've tended
to move at the pace of law.
Um, the criminal element moves at the pace of money.
So they are very nimble, very responsive,
and wherever there's a weak link, they will, um, expose it.
So this is this connection over a long period of time.
Governments have operated like that, I think is,
Is that unique to New Zealand?
What we are seeing in terms of drugs being moved?
Are we, we the only country in the world experiencing that?
No. And if you look at those results around the world,
they're all seeing those massive spikes.
Australia is in the same position.
Um, I'm aware the advisory group was just in
a Australia recently.
Um, the same sort of measures.
New Zealand is quite unique in terms
of the way we do the wastewater testing.
Um, so we have a very, um, very robust system.
So we have very real time data.
So, um, I think the last report has shown a, a little bit
of a leveling off, which is encouraging,
but still nowhere near where we want it to be.
So I think we have, um, the benefit of really good data, um,
but we are not unique around the world.
Francisco Hernandez, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm interested in following on from line of inquiry that,
um, the member, the Honorable Jenny Sesa, um, articulated
and also noting, um, to the member Tim Ey, that, you know,
we all know
and acknowledge the good work that customs do, uh,
the differences that members on this side
haven't implemented.
I'm not the one in the committee here implemented
that question, and I suggest you target it to the ministry,
two customs, unlike the government on that bench over here.
So one of the, tell them now, tell them
what a great job they're doing right now.
Well, yeah, you guys are doing a fantastic job.
Unfortunately, the government has cut some, has made
baseline saving targets, cuts,
which has clearly degraded the capacity of customs,
despite assertions to the contrary.
And one of those things has been the, um, spending of nearly
around $5 million in redundancy since 27th of November,
uh, 2023, as well as four redundancy processes.
Can you talk through what the impact that has had in terms
of, uh, staff morale, in terms of disruption, in terms of,
um, time being spent in dealing
with redundancies rather than doing the real mahi
that customs needs to do?
And so far as it relates
To the Estimates looking forward?
Yeah, so I, I would suggest that, um,
and every agency that that runs through this process,
I think it's, um, credit to the organization
that they are constantly looking at opportunities to improve
overall customs, um, has a very low staff retention rate
and, uh, very, very, um, low staff turnover rate.
They have, um, in terms of government agencies,
they have good retention of staff.
So I think that reflects well in, you know,
your measure of morale.
Um, I think that your statement around, um,
that we have undermined
or compromised, despite my assertions that is, you know,
untrue, we have not undermined our
frontline capacity to respond.
Those assertions are not false. They're absolutely true.
We have not undermined our frontline capability
to deliver custom services.
There has been staff restructures.
There will always be staff restructures across agencies in
order to ensure you're efficient.
As I've said, some of those savings result on the fact
that we have been able to produce a lot of, um,
efficiencies through the use of technology.
Um, the traveler declaration,
which was implemented has also created some savings,
the ability to use, um, data
and analytics, um, of the movement of cargo.
I think you have to also appreciate
that customs is not just an enforcement agency.
They support trade, they support travel.
Um, there is a lot of roles
that are not involved in border enforcement,
and I think that's the collective size of the organization
and recognition of the work it does.
Okay. Supplementary Laura McClure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just for the benefit of
the committee, um, I think some
of the members might not understand supply
and demand when it comes to, to drug use in this country.
Um, and custom's role is really seizing at the border
and trying to prevent it entering,
but this is a much larger issue.
And in your capacity, obviously describing the problems, um,
and how you see them, how is the work with police going
and how do you feel like, um, we have the base improvements
and the best way that you could target that,
and how do you feel that it's progressing at this point?
So I think the cooperative relationship, um,
between police and customs,
and I think if I could, you know,
highlight one recent operation, which was Operation gida,
um, which you would've seen in the media, the steel beams
that were, um, that was one of the, like those key examples
of that cooperative relationship
where customs identified it.
Um, they organized the control delivery
and then police came in and monitored and watched.
So not only did we get the drugs,
we got all the offenders in the ring involved in it.
So it was a tremendous, rather protracted,
but really effective relationships.
So at that level, we know we can do more.
Um, this week, um, there was the, uh,
transnational organized crime, um, forum
of the first two days of this week where all
of the agencies come together, but police definitely leads.
Um, I think I've got a significant advantage in the fact
that I have, um, both the police delegation organized crime
as well as customs, um, the cooperative relationship.
And that's where the funding around, um, the work
that customs is doing has been so important in this budget
because it is a significant investment in
intelligence as well as staffing.
Um, being able to target that frontline.
Uh, the border security bill that I mentioned
before is another way where we are looking at opportunities
to strengthen legislation to increase the power
for customs as we move forward.
Um, and that compliments work that police do, um,
in their legislation so
that we can work more cohesively together.
So moving forward, there is quite a bit of work
around that cooperation.
Um, and that's, I, I think the example that we're trying
to set for that cooperative relationship
amongst the other agencies.
Thank you. Final supplementary. Thank you.
Um, I just think it's worth noting also that
I'm just interested your view, uh,
but that there is a significant amount
of money in this budget for, uh, in the 20 25, 26 budget
for, uh, strengthening the border, uh,
$29 million extra going in.
And I'm just interested to know, um, what, what initiatives
or how that will be, um, spent over the course
of the four year appropriation to Okay.
To help fight this particular issue. Thank you.
Um, importantly, one of the main, main initiatives is,
will be an increase in staff,
and that is the increase in staff at a
frontline level position.
Um, we are looking at probably about 60 positions
will be created through that.
Um, the other component is to actually use that staff
to target that small to medium, um, quantity of goods.
So that is that, um, the, the air freight, the airport, um,
we've seen a massive increase in, um, couriers
through the airport, um, seized unaccompanied luggage
as well as those, um, couriers bringing, um, so having that,
um, presence, frontline presence will be really important.
Uh, the others is using the intelligence component,
but also, um, creating a, an additional overseas role,
which will be, um,
really critically important from a customer's perspective is
our international relationships.
So having those presence
and having met with those staff overseas, um, it is
hugely beneficial for us to have frontline New Zealand, um,
enforcement agencies are highly respected overseas.
Um, and we've actually responded to that, um, by, you know,
the, the request for having more presence in this budget
will deliver that as well.
Awesome. Thank you. Right. Next question.
Honorable Damian O'Connor.
Okay, Jenny, uh,
supplementary actually, in terms of the staff.
So in terms of your new, um, money this year
for, um, customs, as you've just explained,
60 new positions,
but minister, that's only half of the 120 positions
that have been disestablished at customs
between January 20, 24
and 9th of June, 2025.
That's actually not my question though.
My question is with regards to this, um,
report from the DEA, um, ministry of Justice, US Department
of Justice, which actually gave us the warning,
this is way back in November, 2024, that Mexican cartels,
uh, present here in, in New Zealand
and Australia, not news to you.
Um, because we, this presence has actually been felt,
uh, for some time.
What we do know, though, this is from your, um,
advisory reports, is their presence is now really,
really increased, um, these, uh, drug cartels from
as far away as South America.
So, um, what are you doing in terms of ensuring
that corruption ports at customs?
What vetting have you directed, um, the comp controller
to do, to ensure that there is better oversight,
um, at the border?
Because what we know from the reports is that about 70%
of insider threats is actually via bribery and corruption.
So, and that's how have you directed our controller
to ensure that that corruption is actually not coming
through and bringing illicit drugs
through from these drug cartels.
So I think it's un appreciate the, the process by which, um,
you know, the, the ministerial, um, responsibility is
to set expectations and I've set those expectations.
Um, I think the customs, um, the comp controller
and the customs, um,
team collectively have been very proactive.
And I, and you will have seen that in the, the responses
to the questions you've put around the processes
that they have for managing, um,
potential corruption weaknesses.
The vetting processes have all been
clearly outlined for you.
I'm happy to rever to Jamie to kind of detail what
that actually looks like, but I'm very confident
that there is significant, um, um, controls
and, um, feelings put in place
to make sure that they weakness.
I think I would highlight that when we talk about corruption
and a trusted insider,
we are not purely talking about government employees,
as you'll see in the report,
and you're seen in the responses
that you've seen the trusted insiders are everyone
involved in the supply chain?
Mm. So it can be baggage handlers, it can be ticket issuers,
it can be, um, freight forwarding companies.
It can be a range of initiatives.
Everyone that has a role to play in the supply chain
that allows goods
and products to be entering this country can be deemed
as a trusted insider.
And so therefore, the response
that we have is not just about
what we do within government agencies
and this additional presence and this additional staff.
And again, I'll go back to the 60 extra staff
or 60 extra staff in the positions that we need them to be.
The redundancies that we went
through were restructuring positions that weren't
where we needed them to be
and weren't delivering what we needed from an organization.
This additional response is about putting positions
where they really need to be
and delivering what we really want to strengthen our border.
And part of that presence is
how we intersect on a trusted insider program.
There is roles that we have to ensure
that those things like unaccompanied baggage, uh,
being monitored and controlled,
and that there is a physical presence where it needs to be
to deter that trusted insider.
On top of that, the border security bill will ensure
that customs have a bit more power
and control over the environments
where our ports and ports need to be.
Can I just have a supplementary to do, um, given
that, you know, you talk about everyone in in supply chain,
I guess the trust, um,
over the last 18 months we've seen New Zealand's reputation,
uh, or ranking in terms of corruption internationally slip,
and I guess that the transnational organized crime would be
part of that, your influence across that supply chain.
So there was a strategy in place, so why did you choose
to park that strategy, not follow through,
and what were the issues that you had with it?
Because there was a 20
to 25 transnational organized crime strategy wasn't there,
and that was being followed
and that has been parked as I understand. So Yeah.
The issues with it. Yeah, I appreciate the question.
Thank you. We are not, um,
we haven't refreshed the strategy.
So the strategy as it's in place, so what we're working
through now is the refresher,
the strategy will occur, um, this year.
So we haven't, we're not walked away from
that strategy position.
Um, what we are working towards is position
Or implementation, Sorry, the implementation
Of that strategy.
I mean, have you followed through? Yes,
We have. Yeah, sorry.
Yeah, so the strategy has been,
but what we are wanting to do now is refresh the strategy
because as, as you can appreciate when it was developed,
it was a, a slightly different environment to
what we're dealing with now, as we've seen the massive
spike in the last year.
Um, and the, the way the cartels
and the out out, you know, the threat is attacking us.
So this is the opportunity to use the advisory group to
look at what everyone else is doing,
what our agencies are doing,
and so that the strategy becomes more broadly applied across
government, um, and how we can do better in our response.
It really isn't that that strategy was wrong, it's just
that the environment changes so much.
We wanna make sure that
that strategy is in line with where we are heading.
And I think that's the opportunity we've got.
Um, so the timing of the advisory group reporting back in
September with their final report
and the refresh of the strategy
and potentially budget bids moving forward,
should all line up through that process.
Supplementary from Tim Costley?
Yeah, just coming back to that sort of suggestion
that you haven't done anything, I'm, I'm reading the, uh,
estimates here on page five of the vote customs.
Uh, and I noticed that you by the look of this, I want
to ask if this is correct
and what the money will be used for.
So there's two parts, but from what,
what I'm reading it here, it looks like you have secured
under new PO policy initiatives, uh, new money
for combating transnational
and serious organized crime at the border.
Two and a half million in the next financial year, then four
and a half, 9 million in 27, 28,
and a further 13.2 million.
So that's 29.2 million over the next four years.
And on top of that, I'm reading five
and a half million in capital injection on top of that.
Is that, is that correct? Is
that you have actually secured even in these, the,
the difficult economy extra money for this.
And are those fundings gonna be used as, as I have read it,
but you may have more information
to be targeting those involved in log qua quantity,
high frequency smuggling, such as, uh, you know,
mail centers or airports.
Uh, also that it will be used
to improve supply chain security
and targeting the trusted insiders
that we've been hearing the questions about
who are using those links to smuggle drugs.
And finally, is it, will it involve extending customs
presence overseas funding a a, an additional liaison officer
to support those investigations offshore
and make sure we have the best information?
So I wonder if you have comment?
Yeah, so, and as you see,
because it's a, a phased in funding as,
as we bring the staff up to strength, um, that
that will be a big component.
I think I can refer to Jamie in terms of,
'cause he, he delivers the operational side of it,
but the, the, the big driver is around building
that workforce cap capability over the next few years.
But the international relationships
and some of that work had already started.
Um, this is about, you know,
there was some temporary reassignment of staff in order to,
to respond to, to test that process.
Um, that's been led really effectively at the airport.
But then as we move forward now,
this is about we can do this permanently.
We can plan, um, a bigger presence.
Um, that's the people presence as well
as those additional roles.
I think as, as we've said, we have stopped
before, they've reached the country more, almost as many,
much drugs as we've stopped at our border.
So those international relationships become
so really critically important, um,
those international relationships.
But I might ask Jamie just to comment on, um, that, how
that staffing or how that function will be delivered.
Thank you, minister. Yes. So it's, uh, just shy
of $35 million over four years.
We grow to 60 people over those four years.
It's not the full 29 million, 30 million in, in year one.
Yeah. Uh, so we will kind of grow as, uh, over that time.
Um, it's more intelligence, it's more investigators
as the minister says, uh, offshore presence
to drive investigations and disrupt drugs offshore.
There's money there for technology, um, software
and, um, uh,
and also a frontline, uh, uh,
airport border enforcement element, um, that
where the uniform at our airports to, um, basically disrupt
inside a threat, uh, that we're, that we're seeing.
So that comes across over four years.
Thank you. A Supplementary from Laura McClure.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, given, I mean, I'm interested to know your thoughts,
minister, and potentially Jamie, because you have been
working in this area a while.
Do you think, why do you think New Zealand's been
targeted by these cartels?
And do you think that domestically over the last sort of six
or so years, um, local activity had really increased
and just the networks between, say our local gangs
and the cartels has, has become quite strengthened.
Um, why do you think that New Zealand has been targeted?
I, I think I can lead in first and then Jamie.
So one of the things we saw, you know, post COVID,
there was a real shift, the organized crime
or the gang presence in New Zealand, you know,
really did, um, blow out.
We know that we have the highest
retail price for methamphetamine.
So in terms of world market mm-hmm.
There's a lot of money to be made here.
So that makes us a very attractive market to be in
because of the sale price, right?
We know, um, from intelligence
that there had been a fair amount of stock piling of drugs
so that, you know,
because they were able, they, they operate like a business.
So they do operate and control release to that
because they wanna high retain that high volume
of money internationally.
This, the, the environment had changed significantly
and that connection, um, through Pacific
and through, um, in, into South America.
And um, you know, there, there had been a lot of, um, um,
connection with that sort of presence here in New Zealand,
which happened, um, you know, over the, over recent years.
So that kind of relationship and it is a business model
and that's what we need to get through.
Mm-hmm. The other thing, just
before I hand it to Jamie, is that we've gotta recognize
that from a organized crime perspective,
they don't really care what the commodity is,
it's about what they make money on.
Mm. So it can be money laundering, it can be, you know, um,
um, drugs, it can be people trafficking, it can be scamming.
It's, there's anything from which they can make
money, they will profit.
And that's why it's across agencies so important. Yeah.
But I think Jamie might be in better position
to say what changed.
I'd say thank you, minister.
I'd say kind of broadly for methamphetamine
and some other drugs, one, um, kind of the way the world is,
it has become easier and cheaper
to manufacture methamphetamine.
If you think cocaine, you need to grow it on a hill,
you have all those kind of enforcement activities
that are spraying or doing whatever.
Actually you can create meth in a warehouse, in a cellar,
whatever, very, very, very cheaply.
Right? Some countries, uh, particularly Mexico, Myanmar
actually the rule of law is challenged.
And so actually the organized crime games there have freedom
to act, freedom to move, and they can create lots
of meth very, very cheaply.
New Zealand pays
amongst the world's highest prices for maths.
Mm-hmm. So for 2024, uh,
price per kilo wholesale Yeah.
In the US seven and half thousand dollars kiwi Yeah.
In New Zealand, $135,000.
And as a minister says, this is a business
and where are you gonna go for your profit?
A hundred percent. And so this is where the high market,
and this is where the Mexican cartels
and in the, it's insane, uh, in the members' question
around the DEA report, we're well aware
of Mexican cartels identifying New Zealand
as being hugely lucrative.
Uh, and so we become targeted kind
of it the New Zealand end.
I think one of the changes, quite frankly,
has been the five oh ones that have been deported back here,
sophistication that they bring,
connectivity that they bring.
We see more diverse trade.
We know illicit trade follows legal trade.
And so all of that coming together, you start
to see this phenomena that that has crack.
Um, so in a way,
'cause we pay amongst the highest prices, we continue
to be very attractive.
We pay amongst the highest prices
'cause we have all good border controls
and good law enforcement and restriction of supply.
Thank you. I could see that we, I mean the trade
Minister don't think there's trade exemptions.
Right. Next question, Francisco. Thank you Mr.
Chair. I wanna
Shift tech A little, little bit
and ask about a issue that's important to, um,
to people in Dunedin.
And that's the issue of, uh, cost recovery
for Dunedin Airport.
So why was there a decision made to charge
Dunedin airport cost recovery when existing airports like
Oakland Airport or not charge for cost recovery?
So I, I think clarifying the issue,
this is about the reestablishment of international airport.
Yeah. So the, the, the point being made is that, um,
across government agencies, not just in cus customs,
it is the, the position that those
that incur the cost should meet the cost.
So the, the cost of processing travelers
through the airport is covered by the fees,
the establishment of Dunedin Airport.
And I think the, the, the concern that was raised
because they had previously been an international airport
was the idea that they didn't need anything.
But as you can appreciate from when Dunedin was last in
international airport to where to now, um,
the threat environment has changed,
the standards have changed, the expectations changed.
So there was had to be not only, um, network in terms
of the technology components had to be,
but the physical structure to accommodate custom staff.
So the decision was made that it had to be, um,
the establishment costs needed to be recovered.
And, um, Hamilton Airport went through the same process.
Um, so, um, that, that is the rationale behind it.
Uh, I've got a couple of steps to that,
but, um, isn't it unfair that, uh, you know, for example,
Auckland's like Auckland Airport are going
through a $6.6 billion redevelopment, uh,
including new gates
and new facilities, including at the international terminal.
And those new facilities will not incur, uh, any like,
levies under the reestablishment cost,
whereas reopening Dunan airport will,
even though it's a much lesser one
and couldn't it have been funded through the, um,
border processing levy mechanism.
So I think to, to clarify from customs perspective,
all activity, um, in terms of,
because they have a activity based costing model.
So the, the, the fees that we receive are only allowed
to be used for the activity.
So we can't use, um, uh, arrival fees
and levies to do anything else.
We can't change.
So all it can be used for is the cost
of processing travelers through our border.
It would be completely remiss for us to allow customs
to collect fees to use for anything else.
Um, your example around Auckland Airport is
that we haven't just established services.
We are moving services around in Auckland Airport.
We are shifting, and the airport
and customs are working very closely together with the NPI
and the other agencies to ensure that continuity of service
is, is occurring
and that, so there has been no ceasing
of travel arrangements, uh, of service arrangements.
So it's not reestablishing anything, it's just moving them
around within Dunedin airport, the traveler fees,
and I know it's sort of, so we, we have a, a fee
that's charged for, um, cargo ships
that coming in containers.
There's a whole range of fees that are applied.
They can only be used under customs rules.
And I'm sure Rich will jump in if I've got it wrong.
But we can only recover for the activity that it relates to.
And I think that we would be
a very bad agency if we started collecting fees
for airport travelers
and use it to pay for, um, mail processing or something.
It's, it has to be.
Um, and that's the activity based costing model
and it's how, um, customs reports on its finances.
Um, I'm sure, Richard, you can jump in. I've got it
Wrong. Maybe just a,
a couple of things.
Uh, the government position was that
as a commercial operator, Dan
and Hamilton have made a decision
to establish all the establish services.
They should be the cost of the establishment, uh, relation
to additional capital or assets
or, uh, recruitment costs for that first part.
Um, because it was basically there decision to operate a,
in a commercial environment
and using the border processing levy to pay
for those costs would be, uh,
cross subsidization from other airports or other traps.
However, the processing costs for those airports,
or any airports indeed, will be met
through the border process levy.
Mm-hmm. So there's no ongoing cost to the airport
as a result of that decision.
Um, and the government's position, does that seem fair to,
uh, ensure that the risk, the commercial risk being taken on
by those individual airports meant
that they should pay those establishment costs?
I think when it comes to Dunedin,
I think if our customs would do well to employ AEC staff.
'cause you certainly can't get anything out of Dunedin,
so hopefully you wouldn't be able to get it
Back.
I'll take that under advisement. Yeah.
Sorry, was there an additional point at the back? No.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, just following on from that,
I'm interested around the eGate replacement,
um, work that's happening.
I understand we're looking at an upgrade program there
across the four sites currently.
That's Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Queenstown.
Yes, that's right. Yep. Okay.
So can you give us some insight around when that's happening
and, and why we're needing to upgrade these eGates?
I'll hand that over. The reason why so is, uh,
the current ones that we have are end of life.
So they're gonna come to end of life, uh, in 2027.
So we need to obviously get on
with the replacement of those.
Uh, as you, as you state quite rightly,
that's across the four existing airports.
We are currently, um, in negotiation
with a commercial provider for that, for those replacements.
And obviously we're looking at sort of next generation gates
that can help expedite, um, processing of passengers
and having a good kind of journey through our airports.
So, um, so there's another part to your question. Yeah.
The timing of it. Oh, the timing of it, sorry.
Uh, we are looking to, as I say, uh, commence, uh,
implementation from mid next year through to, um,
having it done mid 27.
And so that won't be extending to the two new airports,
Dunedin and Hamilton
that are flying international, not currently.
Correct. Okay. This existing stuff can't
be repurposed to there.
Uh, no. Just the way we finance it
and our, our capital provisions, et cetera, kind
of our full replacement, we would have to go away
and have a look at whether we have the, uh,
the capital limit finances
to stretch it across other airports.
Yeah. Okay. I was very pleased to join the official welcome
of the first flight of the Hamilton at the start of this.
And so very pleased to see that back in our region.
But, um, perhaps some insight too just on the travel
declaration where that, you know, we've seen
that evolution over the last few years so much better,
so much better, lot easier. Those forms. And,
And I, I sort of would comment on that.
There is, um, now work being done to
how we can do notifications through the systems
as well. So, um, that connect is that what
Fund tagged for?
Yeah, so, and, and we are very keen to
and use this committee 'cause I'm sure there's millions
of people watching to, um,
get the uptake on the traveler declaration.
'cause uh, we're still hovering just under that 70% mark,
which we really want to, um, tip over the top of.
So, um Right. Yeah.
Are you seeing particular trends in that from,
from different locations
where there's better uptake than others
or into certain airports?
Uh, I think it's airlines.
I think we get better uptake from certain flights.
Um, we still have a challenge
where some are still giving out the paper as well, so, um,
it gets a bit of confusing, but Yeah. Yeah.
Um, would, Would that be because of the issue
with internet connection for the travel declaration?
Because I know if you've forgotten
to do it when you take off on your plane Yeah.
The patchy internet connection. Yeah. Yeah.
So and that's can then you can't do it
and then some people run out time when they get there.
Yeah. So it's that early notification stuff
that we're trying to work through right.
Is getting people to do it before they board
and those sort of things that sort of early.
So it comes. So there has been a, um, a bit of work
around how we kind of,
So sorry, does that pop up on
airline notifications, for example?
It does Notification. Are other airlines doing that too?
Correct. Yeah. But it's only 24 hours out
and sometimes people are already traveling in that space.
Mm-hmm. So, yeah.
Why is It on, sorry, Damien first can I, sorry,
I have many questions. Can
I just clarify because I think the point of tension
between NPI, biosecurity and New Zealand
and customs was actually people that, you know,
in the last 24 hours can very well pick up, uh, something
that might be high biosecurity risk.
Mm-hmm. So, you know, might be all very well
fill it in Yeah.
But if your circumstances
or where you've visited has changed, yeah.
I guess that is still a tension.
Yeah. And, and it is that, um,
that push notification stuff would be really useful in the
reminder stuff as well.
Um, but I think there's full credit
to the way customs are doing a lot of, um, which is
where the intel side of things, a lot more analytics around
where people have traveled from.
So that early notification of
where people have come from allows them
to do a bit more analytics around where,
where there might be some risk changes
around the travel movements.
So, um, that's all part of that sort
of technology information use.
That's been really whatever the case. That's great. Yeah.
Did you ever something, sorry. No,
I kind of interrupted everybody.
A new question, and this is actually about the Pacific.
So one of the things that we read, um,
and the report is a warning that the Pacific is being used
as a crime corridor, uh, to New Zealand and to Australia.
I wanted to know, given your unique, uh, position
as both minister of customs
and Associate Minister of Police,
what new funding agreements
or joint operations are you looking forward to?
Especially because we see that, um,
with what's happening in the United States,
there is a projection of about a thousand
that might be deported from the us.
So it's not only the five oh ones that have been sent
to the Pacific, it's also those other Yeah.
Um, that are going to be sent in very new future.
So what are your plans or actions?
So I, I think that was why it was so important that one
of the early reports from the advisory group was that, um,
assessment of the Pacific.
I hope to be getting there over the next month, um,
to meet with those agencies.
But beyond funding it, it is stuff
that is already being done is
the strengthening relationships.
So customs have a very good presence.
Immigration is a very good presence,
and police have a very good presence.
I know the commissioner has just been,
just come back recently from the Cook Islands.
So, so there's a lot of, um, stuff that we're already doing,
which is about making this a priority.
And this is why it was so important
to have these conversations within the report to, to,
you know, highlight these issues to, um, you know, support.
The reason why we're doing this, this is not critical
of any agency or the Pacific itself.
It's about how we can lean in better.
So I'm not, at this point, it's not about the funding,
it's about the appreciation of what we're currently doing
and how we can strengthen those relationships.
And as I've said, you know, it's
across all of those agencies.
It's mfa, it's immigration, it's customs, it's police,
and we have presence and customs do a lot of work already.
We, um, train, um, drug dogs, we train personnel.
We go over, um, through, um, in this, uh, through the, um,
chaga event in the Pacific.
We had all of the, um,
customs were actually sent staff up to help process.
Um, we see a lot of opportunity to support them around
how they gather revenue
and ensure that they, you know, have the best experience
and best controls of their border.
Um, because we know the, the vulnerability they have, so
how we can support their economy as well
as support the operational knowledge.
So we do already lean in.
Um, but what we wanna do is look at those further ways
that we can, um, collectively across all
of the New Zealand government agencies, um,
support the Pacific and support that work.
Um, they do regularly connect, um, in a, in a range of ways
through, um, not just training initiatives,
but sharing of intel, sharing of information, um,
preparedness, um,
and respond to how they investigate and prosecute.
Um, so that, that's kind of, um,
but in, in terms of future funding, that's
what we really wanna see around
what the new strategy position, what the final report
of the mag does,
and then go back to my ministerial colleagues about what,
what, what are the practical additional things
that we can do to strengthen those relationships.
So one of the things that we know from
the Pacific, sorry, Mr.
Chair Karen, is, um, corruption is an issue. Yeah.
Um, and we see in, you know,
the media just in the last few days, uh, corruption in Fiji
and, and how they're trying to deal with that.
We also know that there's been a lot of, um,
drugs that have been stopped.
Um, yeah, right in Fiji.
My question though is about New Zealand, um,
and it follows on from a question that Honorable Dam
and Con said before that we are beginning to go down
in terms of, uh, our rankings mm-hmm.
Uh, in terms of corruption.
And we still don't have an anti-corruption law as far
as I know in our country.
So how can we lead on this? Yeah.
And we ourselves don't have an anti-corruption law. Yeah.
And that was, you know, one you will have seen, that's one
of the key recommendations from the advisory group is the
development of a national, um, corruption strategy.
Um, Australia has one, um, Canada has one, we don't,
so we're a bit of an outlier.
So that was something that has been identified.
Again, this is, you know, about identifying
what we don't have and how can we deliver it
and how can we do it and supporting the Pacific
for the same process, that corruption strategy.
Um, but one of the biggest ways that we can strengthen or,
or, or make them more resilient
to corruption is their economic viability
and how we can support their economic, um, position.
And that, you know, the customs work
around revenue collection at their borders
and making sure that they are optimizing every opportunity,
whether it's through travelers
or trade, um, that they're ensuring
that they are getting everything they should be collecting.
Um, so that's that support.
One of the things that I think is, um, you know,
that the reviewer will identify
as whether there's opportunities to, um,
build our physical presence in those locations,
um, versus just advice.
So those are the things. Continue. I have another question.
It's about containers. And so one of the things
that you're investing in is, um,
technology and all that, right?
Because there are a lot of of drugs that still come through,
unfortunately, you see in the news that some
of those containers, for whatever reason,
they're not screened and, and customs don't pick it up.
They get picked up after, you know,
after the container's actually gone out.
So what is it that customs have in plan in place now
to ensure that there are less of
that happening in the future?
Because we need to fight transnational organized crime Yeah.
From coming through our, our borders with illicit drugs.
So I think first of all, we'd clarify that there's nothing
that comes through that isn't analyzed by customs.
So it's about the risk profiling of where it's come from,
where it's traveled from, what it is.
There's a lot of intelligence without exposing all the
internal secrets about how we do the analytics of
what trade, what goods come through our borders.
So there is a lot of analytics.
So we target our resources to where it needs to be,
and we've seen how much we're intersecting.
So that, that's a big part of that, how we do more
around the, um, analytics
and, um, of what's coming through our borders.
Um, the other component is
that it's not just in the container system.
So quite often it's, um, it's put into the container
and into the refrigeration unit.
It's attached to the outside of ships, et cetera, et cetera.
Mm-hmm. So it's not just, um, the,
the person who's sending the cargo may have no
involvement in this at all.
So it's about how, you know, those containers are checked
and verified that intel process.
So that's why this, um, the presence stuff in terms
of the freight that's coming
through the air freight, et cetera, that's coming through.
That's why the physical presence is so important.
Um, but also the border security bill, um,
is gonna be really critical to that.
'cause that's about strengthening the powers that customs
have in those environments
and what they can do to control goods and movements.
Um, as you know, there's been a lot of, um,
port infiltrations, um, where they have, um,
broken into the ports, et cetera.
So those are the additional things that we're looking
through the border of security bill.
But there is, you know, there, there's always more,
as you said earlier, there's always more we can do.
What we're trying to do is work through where,
where the greatest risks exist.
So I think that yes, there is always more we can do,
but I think we're heading in the right direction
around the use of intelligence
and the analytics and processes.
But Jamie might have some additional, just
before you answer, 'cause you might
actually have an answer to this as well, minister.
My worry is actually about timing,
because you've been in the role for 18 months.
We've got these advisory reports now,
but it seems from some of the answers I'm getting is
that we're waiting until September
to then take it to cabinet.
In the meantime, transnational organized crime are still,
you know, coming through.
I mean, that's a very long time to wait for,
for the advisory group to advise you.
Why don't you just act,
because some of these things we already
know what we should be doing.
And, and that's why I highlight that we did it.
So that was the, the point
that I was making earlier in this conversation.
We did act very early on.
We started the budget bid
for the earlier, the increased funding.
Um, but we can't do anything till the money comes through,
which came through in May.
So we started the budget bid last year.
We started work on the border security bill last year.
We started the purchase of the, and,
and delivered the purchase of the un crewed, um,
surface vessels with the Navy.
Um, we are exploring the, um, unmanned aircraft components.
Um, we have, um, restructured the organization to redirect.
We have improved the intel systems that we are using.
So I'd say to say we haven't acted
as unfair to the organization.
I think they have acted very quickly
and very promptly to the threats.
And there's just that we now think
there is even more we can do.
Okay. Next question. Dan, Thank you.
In the interest of time, I just thought I'd move
us along a little bit.
I'm just interested in collection of crown revenue, um,
because it's a very important part of the overall picture,
but also for the budget going forward.
And I note that, uh, forecast, uh,
revenue forecast is $18.48 billion in 25
and 26 increasing to 21 billion 28 29,
which is an enormous amount of money.
Um, my question is, um, is this realistic
and is it achievable?
And what risks have you identified, uh, around this
that might, um, have some implications in terms
of the numbers that customers come up with?
I'd say it's very achievable
because they're very good at numbers.
Are you,
Can I just make a clarification
that actually the forecasting is undertaken by treasury
and so our, our job is to collect all due revenue
and we aim obviously to collect as close to that target
as possible makes the question, but it's a,
but it's a, a forecast based on, uh, you know, volumes
of imports, uh, uh, volumes of, uh, uh,
particular types of imports in, in relation
to tobacco, alcohol, and fuel.
So it is really a, a, uh, based around
what they see the economy, uh, how they,
how they see the economy performing, in particular in terms
of numbers of imports
and, um, particular commodities in which
we collect excise tax.
So, mm-hmm. So while we have a view on the forecast,
generally speaking of this treasury's view on, you know,
this is how many s are gonna come in in the country.
That's quite right. Um, and,
and so risks related to that, that may have an implication.
Uh, I mean, have you identified any, have you
Yeah, we go through influence.
We go through an annual process of,
of working out who we need to audit.
So we, we develop a,
a regular audit program which is focused mainly on, uh,
significant revenue risks that we might see,
or non-compliance, uh,
that we may see across the freight sector
or the alcohol excise sector or the tobacco sector.
So we'll target our audits appropriately.
Our audit program tends to produce an additional, uh,
fine uh, 30,
$40 million a year in, in that level.
So, but what we also see is we run a random assurance,
proper random assurance programs across, uh,
the freight sector, impulse in particular.
And we see a high level of compliance as a result of those,
um, targeted, uh, as a result of those random checks.
Excellent. So we're aiming to find the high risk targets
and, uh, order them appropriately
and managed on compliance in that matter.
That's fantastic. Thank you. Can I,
May I just, sorry, may I just add the treasury forecast
update is around 17.8 billion for this year.
So it has been lowered due to kind of the economy,
but we are on track to collect that.
Okay. Honorable Dan, can I Thank you, minister.
And you answered a question around the
transnational organized crime strategy to 20
to 25 and said it's in place.
Um, and you're going to review it.
Uh, how does that then align with the report?
The may report from your minister advisory group that says,
quote, New Zealand does not have a whole of government
national anti-corruption strategy
that would focus on industry sectors that are at high risk
of corruption by organized crime.
While work has been done in the past,
it has never resulted in an agreed and publicized strategy.
This creates a significant gap in the country's ability
to prevent, detect,
and respond to corruption risks in both the public
and private sectors.
She actually says we don't have a strategic approach in
place and that your advisory group
has raised this as a major risk. Yeah.
So that's the corruption strategy,
not the transnational organized crime strategy.
So the corruption strategy, if you look at
what Australia has, and Canada has, it's a very specific
corruption strategy.
Um, so the transnational organized crime is, is,
is a slightly different strategy.
So, and, and you're right, there may be an, yeah,
there may be an opportunity to merge those two,
but I think it's really important
to have the corruption strategy in line.
What, um, our, our five eyes partners have is that, um,
differentiate it.
'cause the, there's slightly different responses around
organized crime component versus corruption.
'cause corruption is not, it's,
it's about the protection
of agencies. It's protection of officials.
If you read a report about, say, the transfer of drugs
through an airport, you'd call it corruption at each level.
And so maybe the attempt
to deline delineate those two as part of the problem
that allows in fact a record amount
of methamphetamine into our country.
And I think the advice I had when, when I sort of went
through that is that there was work
about the corruption component,
but it never actually formulated into a strategy document.
The transnational organized crime, which again was
before um, my time in this role was, um, looking at, at
that transnational organized crime relationship,
which differentiated. So I think it's, does
Doesn't, to respect, doesn't your explanation
just highlight the modelle That is our attempts
to get on top of an issue here,
which has grown significantly in the last 18 months
in the absence of a corruption strategy
means it's virtually impossible for us to get no
to the layers and the drivers of this illegal behavior.
No, and I, I would say that that's, you know, the,
the corruption strategy is, is that hasn't existed at all.
Um, that that is not something
that has occurred within this government.
Corruption has existed for a long time.
We haven't had a, a cohesive response
as a country we should have.
Um, and that's why I think the, the drivers
that we're doing is, is promoting that.
And, you know, full credit to, as, as I've said
to the advisory group, this is about being bold
and being confronting
and making sure that we can look at, at, at
where our vulnerabilities are and how we can best respond.
Um, and that's what we'll do.
Very good. Alright.
That brings us to an end of the allocation of time.
Sit down for today's hearing.
Thank you very much, minister for your insights.
And, and thank you Jamie, Richard
and the wider customers team.
Really appreciate that frontline work you're doing out there
and what is an increasingly challenging
environment. Um, so thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank
This is gonna be different private to customs.
Mm, absolutely. Oh, really? Work.
I, yeah.
How are you? The last part? Hello everybody.
Afternoon. Oh,
this very swivel chairs.
Gotta be careful how you sit down. Hang.
I know what you pull the right lever. That's better.
Yeah, that's the one. And that's much taller now.
I thank you very much. Yes. Does have a little lever.
Make yourself taller. Feeling a little taller than it was.
Very short. Oh, so much interesting.
Chair here. If you wish to join.
I can't have you sit back. Oh, okay.
Well, was try. Nice. Try my friend.
Oh, no, no. That was Don.
I borrow not that he's not allowed to use it.
Know if you'd like to put it on it's up to Sure. You can.
It's camera. And I tend to leave things in his desk.
He gets very upset. Are you one of those awful people
that leaves things off desk?
I'm very bored. Mm.
If someone's, I'm like a very tiny No,
don't ever come to my office.
Do forget. You might, you might get p in there. Okay.
Okey dokey. We are here. We've settled. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Anyway. Yeah.
Laura behind.
All right. Good afternoon. We'll get back underway
with our afternoon section of our hearings estimates.
So welcome along to the defense minister,
honorable Judith Collins.
Wonderful to have you join us.
And joined as well by Associate Minister of Defense,
honorable Chris Pink.
Great to have you here too.
Minister, uh, chief Defense Force, secretary of Defense,
and assembled guests and friends.
Thank you very much for being here.
Really appreciate your finding effort.
Uh, can I just start by thanking all those defense personnel
who are currently serving for
the amazing work they're doing?
We really appreciate that. Uh, it is a big challenge.
You know, there are storm class on the horizon,
but they turn up every day and do the work.
So thank you very much. Uh, minister Collins would like
to end over you for some introductory comments.
I understand we have a wee video to watch as well.
Oh, we do. And then we will get into questions.
I think we're having that at the end of my, my few words.
Yes. Well, thank you very much for the invitation
to address the committee.
Joined today, as you've noted by the Minister for Veterans
and Associate Minister of Defense, Chris Pink, uh, secretary
of Defense, Brooke Barrington
and Chief Defense Air Force, oh, sorry,
air Marshall Tony Davies.
Uh, today I wanna outline my priorities
for defense agencies in the year ahead.
Key focus of this is the implementation
of the Defense Capability Plan or the DCP.
The government has committed
to a substantial investment in defense,
something that is necessary.
As New Zealand faces its most challenging
and dangerous strategic environment for decades.
National security is fundamental
to our country's wellbeing and prosperity.
And protecting New Zealanders from threats as well
as advancing national interests is a core priority
for the government.
The DCP, which we released in April, contains $12 billion
of planned commitments over the next four years,
including $9 billion of new spending subject
as you would expect to business cases.
The DCP outlines a pathway to doubling our defense spending
to more than 2% of GDP over the next eight years.
And it is a message to New Zealanders that we are prepared
to invest in their security to our partners
and ally that we will contribute what we need to
and to the people of the NZDF, that we believe in them
and what they do on our behalf for all Kiwis.
And I'm delighted today
to announce the government has expanded the criteria
for medal recognition for our people
who have served in operations supporting United Nations
Security Council sanctions against North Korea.
This medal, the N-Z-G-S-M 2002 Korea has
already been awarded to 180 personnel.
And the move to Widen eligibility means a further 350
personnel will be so recognized.
Why do we do this? Because it matters to our people who do
what we ask of them when we ask it often trying conditions.
And we know this means an awful lot
to them and to their whanau.
And the first step towards implementing the DCP
was last month's budget.
2025 announcements, which included 11 new asset equipment
and infrastructure projects.
$2.7 billion of capital and three
and $563 million of operating funding was budgeted
for priority projects, including the replacement
of the cease bright maritime helicopter fleet
to Boeing 7 5 7 aircraft
and the Javelin Antiar Missile System.
These capability projects accompany a $957 million
set aside for defense missions people, state maintenance
and international engagements.
The successful implementation
of the DT P requires a strong
partnership with the defense industry.
It is important that we grow New Zealand's industrial
and logistical base as we head into a more volatile world.
And defense is developing an industry strategy
for release later this year, which will provide clarity
to industry of what is needed by defense when it is needed
and within what budget.
Strengthening of relationships with our ally
and international partners is another key priority.
The government is committed to working
with regional partners
to uphold the international rules based system.
And I recently signed a military agreement
with the Philippines, which enables our two militaries
to work more closely together.
Our partners often tell us
that they truly value New Zealand's contributions
to global security and respect the work
of our defense personnel.
This was reiterated to me during my most recent visit
to this Shangri La dialogue in Singapore.
New Zealand demonstrates its commitment
to collective security through working closely with partners
and international operations,
which is why the government is also prioritizing
and increased level of deployments.
We need to continue to be more present, agile, responsive,
reliable and predictable.
In the last 12 months, we've extended our deployment
of specialist NZDF teams to the UK
and Europe to support the brave people of Ukraine.
And we continue to deploy personnel to the Middle East
to protect some of the world's most
essential shipping lanes.
Workforce strategy and regulatory review is underway.
It is important to the government
that the NZDF has a workforce that fit for purpose
and able to deliver military effects to a high standard.
And it's expected that this work will be
delivered in the coming months.
Along with this work, we are undertaking review
of legislative and policy settings to ensure
that they too are fit for purpose.
There has been a stunning turnaround in attrition rates
with our regular force attrition now at 6.8%
as at the end of May.
This is down from a peak of 15.8% two years ago. Amazing.
I have asked defense to deliver all of these priorities
with a focus on financial prudence
to ensure we get the best value for taxpayer dollars.
These priorities ensure we have our eyes firmly on the
horizon to secure New Zealand's future
prosperity and security.
Thank you for your time. Before I hand over to the Secretary
of Defense and Chief of Defense Force, I'd like
to share an excellent NZDF video with you,
which is all about our DCP
Hugh Lights.
Today is truly a landmark day for the coalition government
and the New Zealand Defense Force
as we announce a significant step change in our defense
spending and also our capability.
And that's why we're releasing a multi-billion dollar plan
for a modern combat capable New Zealand Defense Force
lifting defense expenditure to 2%
of GDP over the next eight years.
Over the next four years,
we have planned commitments totaling $12 billion,
which includes $9 billion of new spending.
This is a significant financial investment
and it represents the floor, not the ceiling.
Defense is not something that can be mothballed
until we need it, because when the chips are down,
you need a force that is ready
and equipped to do whatever it is asked of it,
and it needs to be able to do it immediately.
'cause when missions are being launched
and guns fired in situations
that affect New Zealand's national interests,
who do we ask to step up?
And here at home when the flood waters arising,
who do we look to to help?
We ask the men and women of our defense force,
and they do it every time without hesitation.
And it is only right that they have the people,
the equipment and support to do what we ask them to do.
Time and time again,
Thank you Minister Ministers, Mr.
Chair Committee. Uh,
as the minister said in your opening remarks,
2024 was a big year for defense
and particularly in terms of the Defense capability plan.
And the ministry is now focused on the work required
to deliver the major projects within that plan.
And we know that we have to deliver
to time while providing value for money
and innovative thinking.
We've put it a slightly different way.
As I've said to various counterparts around the world,
we've been given entrusted with quite a lot
of taxpayer money, we have to get it right.
Uh, it's it's not trivial. Uh, it's really important.
So our attention, uh, is now focused on the delivery
of the DCP, the delivery
of a defense industry strategy in the next quarter,
and plans for the 2027 review of the DCP so
that it remains a live, a live document that's fit
for purpose and reflects not only our strategic,
our strategic position and our fiscal position.
Um, I just wanna focus about on delivering of,
on the delivery of products to manage complex projects.
And many of these are complex and expensive projects.
The ministry and the Defense Force use a scalable
and resilient and well tried
and tested system called the Capability Management System.
It's been independently reviewed three times over the years,
and it's, and it's come out of those reviews
as a robust example
of long term capital planning within the public sector.
And so each significant capability project within the DCP
will be managed by an integrated project team,
which is both the ministry
and the Defense Force led by the ministry,
but comprising project managers
and commercial leads who work alongside NZDF personnel
and industry e expertise
and specialist advice is called upon when needed.
That's a, it's an end-to-end system, which has been around
for a number of years now
and we're well positioned to start delivering on this DCP.
So we will establish teams to manage the pipeline
of indicative investments identified in the DCP.
And once business cases are approved,
teams are built over time depending on the
complexity of the project.
So for example, one of the major pieces of work,
which we've been funded for in budget 25
and which we are now have well underway is the Maritime
Fleet Renewal Project, which is basically a multi-year piece
of thinking and advice and then purchase
and then introduction into service of 10 out of 11
of our current naval fleet.
So that's a big piece of work which
we are really focusing on.
So the plan commitment
of 12 billion over the next four years is significant.
We know we have to focus on delivery
and that's why we are phasing
and planning personnel regeneration
plus our capability management system,
plus our business case advice to government in such a way
that we can deliver on the DCP, not only to the confidence
of the government, but to the confidence
of the public and the taxpayer.
Uh, and I welcome the fact that the first part
of this committee is exactly about
this hearing is about procurement
and trying to prove
that you can have confidence in what we're about.
Thanks very much. Yes.
Chair committee members, it's, uh, it's great
to be here alongside Mr. Collins and Minister P
and to take your questions again.
I look forward to talking about the global developments
that have happened, um,
since last time we spoke in December,
and what the NZDF is doing to shape our thinking
and what we're basically doing around the world
and our readiness to be able to respond to those events.
In order to keep New Zealand
and New Zealanders safe, we pay close attention
to events on the international stage.
Our people are deployed, posted,
and training around the globe.
And today there's 837 of them as we, as we sit here today.
And we need to keep them safe
as they do their critical jobs.
Strategic competition is affecting everything we do.
The simple fact of the matter is
that the world is far more militarily competitive than it
has been for 80 years.
And in my military career, I have not seen it
as challenging as it is today.
Competition of this sort is unpredictable
and we see that in Ukraine.
The changing course of the war has challenged us
to remain flexible in the way we support the armed forces
of the Ukraine and the Middle East.
The conflict between Israel
and Iran has heightened the risks to that region.
And Indo-Pacific nations, such as China,
are rapidly building their military capacity,
their capability
and reach, including reaching into our own near region.
In an environment where military conflict
and strategic competition dominates the headlines,
the New Zealand Defense Force needs to be responsive,
capable, across a wide range of activities
and combat ready every day.
Our approach is not to sit back and admire the problem.
We're active around the globe working with others
to deter aggression, to restore security,
and to strengthen the international rules and norms.
Since I've appeared
before you in December, the need for the NZDF to be
operationally ready has only increased
as global security has become even more uncertain
in our immediate region.
We remain heavily committed to working with partners
to improve regional security tasks such
as maritime surveillance and training.
Assistance to regional forces are some of the core business
for the NZDF In the wider Indo-Pacific,
we remain or we maintain a busy program
of operations and engagement.
We've deployed our P eight Poseidon aircraft
to monitor sanctions against North Korea,
undertaking cooperative maritime exercises in the South
China Sea and supportive diplomacy in India, Japan,
Singapore, and the Philippines.
We are just concluding six months in command
of the maritime combined task force 1 5 0, which is battling
drug smuggling in the Indian Ocean.
The frigate to Kaha deployed as part of that task force.
This was its first trip to the region following upgrade
of its combat systems.
I recently visited many of our deployed missions.
The efforts our people,
and the professionalism, enthusiasm that I saw when
during those visits gives me great
confidence in your defense force.
And the high regard, they are held in by those who host them
and work alongside them.
The NZDS readiness continues to recover from very high
attrition and infl
and the inflationary environment has made everything
we do more expensive.
So the three services are all working closely together
with their Australian counterparts.
This month we're sending a joint force on h hm NZ deaths,
Canterbury to exercise.
Telus say large multinational exercises like this are
vital to ensuring we are ready for modern combat
and also to make us interoperable with our partners.
The Defense Capability Plan
and recent budget 25 announcements have buoyed our people.
They know all too well the direction
the world is heading in.
And they have trained and have signed up to do
what is necessary to defend New Zealand's interests.
Finally, as a defense force, we are very aware
of the government's priorities.
And when we stand ready to respond, when called,
and to carry our weight alongside our partners and our ally,
and we will do so in a way that is fiscally responsible
as the taxpayer expects of us.
I've engaged a lot with my five,
our five eyes counterparts and other partners.
And as chiefs of defense force of our respective nations,
we do everything we can to try
and avoid sending our troops into conflict.
But if we are called upon by our governments, we must do so.
Knowing we have to be successful
and we have to get it right first time.
I have every faith, faith in those
who aren't answer the call to serve knowing we may need
to deploy them into harm's way.
And I'd like to take a moment to thank all the soldiers,
sailors, aviators,
and our defense civilians
for their continued and committed service.
Thank you very much. Excellent.
Thank you very much for that. So you will have received a
copy of the, uh, agenda
that we have agreed for today's meeting.
We will be reasonably flexible within that, um,
and the timelines are indicative.
But we'll start the overview of appropriations.
Uh, first question from the honorable opinion.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you Ministers.
Um, uh, can I first start by, uh, also supporting that
towards our current and pasts of personnel, uh,
and acknowledge minister, your, uh, the, the
meall recognition
that you mentioned are fantastic stuff, um, to the vote.
And specifically on, uh, the defense vote, there is a, uh,
uh, proportion in there approximately $20 million,
which is a lot of money, uh,
that looks towards the discharge of your duties.
I think that's the word. I I can get the right word exactly
from the, from the vote document, if you'll bear with me.
Uh, it says here, just over $20 million
to support the Minister of Defense
discharging their responsibilities given it's a sizable
amount of money, minister.
And we've talked about, it's in the vote documents.
If I'm going on the
document, that might be the bureaucratic.
I just wonder if you can explain what that is and yeah.
How we might trace whether
or not that's getting value for money.
What page you on? Page 30,
well, 2025, sorry to say.
I don't get my own plane for that.
Yes, I think you'll find that's probably to do.
You may discharge that duty.
You may find it's something to do
with answering questions. And so
If I may, if I can let the officials
have a look through the documents.
'cause i I saying yes, I don't have that popped away.
Ready to spend 25 What page 25? 25?
Yeah, the first high department. Here we go. Output expense,
I believe you referred to the both defense.
Uh, $25 million.
Um, I think what it relates
to is the three activities the ministry does, which is
what the system paid delivery and policy advice.
You do have to come, Sorry.
It's, it's the policy advice and those sorts of things.
So unfortunately not my double check,
just want to confirm this is, it's a good
Idea though. Defense,
Uh, 20, um, what it relates to
The three activities that, uh, um,
the ministry undertakes.
So that's capability managing mental of capability delivery,
uh, policy advice, uh, and audit assessment.
It's contained within that.
So they're the activities that, um, that contain in that
Ought to be clear, I think our interpretation of that,
that money that goes to the Ministry of Defense
for our functions in support of the Minister of Defense
rather than going to the minister.
Okay. Sorry, I'm just quoting from words
that are in the vote document,
so I apologize there's any confusion there.
And I think it's a good thing to make sure
that there is no confusion there
because, um, to your words, uh, secretary,
you've spoken about making sure that, uh, strong policy
and legislative support for the execution of the DCP
and the role of performance moving forward.
Uh, I think that's really important to make sure
that there doesn't seem to be a pot sitting here for
that while the Ministry of Defense still has money here
to actually do that job, which is, that's my question.
Do you have any further reflection
On No, I think the only point I'd make is that we want
to be absolutely sure we're not misleading the committee.
So we're gonna go back and have a good hard look at this.
And if the answer we've given proves to be either incorrect
or, or partly incorrect, we will come back to the committee.
Either way, we'll talk to the clerk if it's completely right
and as we've described it,
we'll just let the clerk sounds completely right
for exactly the reason that the meeting. Thank you, sir.
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Next question, Dr. Lauren Nan.
Thank you. Um, so my question is,
and this is something that probably other people would touch
on later on, but I'm looking at some of in initiatives.
Page 25, 1 of the ones right at the bottom.
And there are a number of things in there that with how
to do commercial sensitivity, which I get,
but one of the things, let's look at the medium range
antiar weapon system.
So if you're looking at something like the FGM 1 4 8
javelin, the commercial cost of that averages at 360
for the equipment and 400,000, sorry, 360,000
for the equipment and 400,000 for the missile itself.
Now, it's all very nice to have the equipment
and the missile, but should there is a need of firing it,
are the use of additional Mr.
Miss missile purchases, et cetera, being factored into
the $9 billion of additional to defense?
Or is that something that is going
to be attacked contingency
and we're gonna be seeing a, in a supplementary
budget next year?
Should there be a need, for example, for a firing?
Well, I can have first crack at that.
Um, the, the CDF can talk about capability itself,
but part of the vote in budget 25 is 957 million
for defense activities, personnel, the state, uh,
and kind of equipment over four years.
So the defense force has at least in part,
been funded mm-hmm.
To ensure that we can start sidestepping 50 years
of practice, which is for the defense force to be equipped
for, but not with that is to say,
to have a capability like the javelin
and then no missiles to fire.
So the defense force is actually being
provided with funding to ensure
that if we upgrade the capability, we are also able,
they're also able to shoot things with it.
Yeah. So all of what you're saying, if I hear
that correctly, is all of
that has been factored into the budget on the,
the hopefully, you know, very low need of firing.
But if that does happen, all
of our equipment has an additional cost of refueling
and repurchasing of missiles o effect.
Mm-hmm. I think you'll find
that tho those figures are planned on the normal usage
rates, we do actually fire the Lins
and, uh, training as well.
We don't just save them up for, um, good luck before combat.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, the, the other point I I point out is
that, um, in terms of value here, um, a lot
of this is going into upgrading the existing systems
to modernize them and make them, uh,
Bible on today's battlefields, um, other,
other defense forces
around the world you might find just throw those out
and go and buy new ones.
So we, we are doing everything we can to make each dollar go
as far as we can by upgrading the ones we've got. Can I,
Sorry, I, I was just thinking too, thank you, um,
Lawrence, that you may have been thinking, well,
if you shoot those, what are we gonna do?
We are gonna get funding for it if we need to go
and shoot these in anger.
I think it's all on in terms of budget.
And we've already been very clear
that the DCP is a F floor, not a ceiling.
Yes. And you'll start seeing, there's a lot more money.
I like to remind people that in World War ii, we, in 19, um,
in, in 1943,
new Zealand's defense budget was 35% of GDP.
That's what happens in a war.
Um, at the moment we've been,
we've been banking the peace dividend
and we're preparing for, to make sure
that we are in a better
position should anything else happen. Thank you.
And if I, I'm sorry, just to, if I can finish that answer,
it is important to reinforce the minister's point.
The DCP is actually a rolling four years.
So there's a two year review,
and at every review we will look forward
and say, what does the world look like?
What does the equipment look like?
What further budget pre claims might be needed?
So it's, we are trying to bring in this,
this flexibility into the d ccp.
So it's not just as you suggest, I think
that it shouldn't be frozen in one moment of time
as the world is changing. That's
Quite right. So
my, my supplement question to that is,
I notice in the budget, uh,
and I think this comes to the point of Dr.
Nan's question, there are, um,
some quite large contingencies, uh, in terms
of operating budget for, uh, ELN and C,
but also for, uh, I think deployed operations and,
and possibly worded slightly differently.
I think it's 20 million per year.
So the, the two questions I would ask, one that 20 million
that is for any potential, um, output, five operations
that come out that, that the government may choose
to commit to overseas.
And if they had extra demands, whether it's on a a,
a javelin or a Jeep, um, or just fuel
and all the other costs of personnel moving overseas
that would come out of
that budget would contribute to the cost of that.
And secondly, is there,
just while we're in not the DCP section yet,
but we just in this overview section mm-hmm.
Um, could you speak to sort of the dependencies,
what the cost pressures are, you're seeing where
that money's likely to be used?
I mean, there's a couple of hundred million in there and,
and that, so I wonder if there's, um,
a comment any of you would like to make.
Thank you.
I think just before,
and we, what we might do is get some
of our capability people up to the table to answer this.
It's quite a specific, um, question.
Um, what I would say that is over the years of capability
and our capability management system, the need
to take a realistic approach to through life costs, whole,
whole of project costs is something we spend a lot
of time taking into account upfront.
So you, you know, the, the years of, um,
just receiving a minimum level of funding to buy, um, this,
and then you have to keep reaching out
and asking for more for this, for the simulator
or, you know, support and maintenance costs at year five
or upgrades at year 10 or something.
Now though, these days we're trying to build all
of those costs and, um,
right in the initial, on the initial amount.
So you are seeing higher contingency fees now.
And, um, as we've seen with some
of our more recent projects like the P eight, uh, like the,
the C one 30, um, sometimes you don't, you know,
you don't need all of that contingency,
but if there's anyone from our capability, we, well, it's,
it's, I think it's less about capability,
it's just about the, the operational costs because mm-hmm.
You've got here 20 million per year for NZDF
overseas deployments to advance New Zealand's defense
and foreign policy objectives.
And then you've got your generic maritime capability,
cost pressure, air capability, cost pressure,
and land capability, cost pressure.
So all I'm all, all, all I'm really asking is when, when Dr
asks about, but what if we have to go overseas
and use, uh, a gun or a person or plane
or a ship, uh, is that 20 million, is that
to go towards the cost of those deployments?
That's not, and do you have within the,
I'm reading a hundred and twenty forty six,
160 million of cost pressures.
Does that give you the room to Yes. Okay.
So I see, I see where you are now.
Um, sorry, I'm on, um, yeah, the summary
of new initiatives 25 26.
Um, so you're talking about the, the funding
that was announced, the four year funding
uplift that was announced?
Yes. Okay. Alright.
So that, those figures in generally, sorry, I was,
I was on the, you know, capability stuff.
Um, but um, that will go
to increasing exactly what you're talking about.
More days at sea, more flying hours, more deployments.
Right. Um, getting, getting more utility
and core purpose out of our, our three services
through normal day-to-day operations.
And then there's the additional 957 million, uh,
for defense missions people, estate
and international engagement,
which has included in there too.
And then there's the baseline as well.
So these are additional funds.
Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, minister.
And, uh, I ask I directly also to the secretary,
um, after what
is a sizable shrink in the public sector noted
to the Ministry of Defense.
Um, you are now, and I applaud the DCP, fantastic,
but we're now asking you to drink from a fire hose.
Are you satisfied that you've got, uh, the personnel,
the expertise, and the budget in order
to execute a meaningful, uh, well DCP?
Uh, yes, I am. It's a risky answer to give, I know
to be quite so emphatic, but let me go back a step.
Uh, the ministry successfully delivered the p eights
and the C one 30 js with roughly the,
the numbers it's got now
and within the system, which has been tried
and tested both by the ministry and between the ministry
and the NZDF.
So our essential architecture
and our essential intellectual property remains strong.
Moreover, in budget 25, we got an extra 1.5 million rising
to 2 million in our years, which allows us
to bring more people in for the Maritime Fleet Review for,
which is the biggest, the biggest bit of thinking
and preparation we have to do by Country Mile.
This has allowed us to bring a, a, some,
a few more people in to deal with, uh, interoperability
and procurement if that's where we go with Australia.
Um, so this budget itself is, has in strategic places,
has allowed us to do strengthening of the ministry
relevant to the DCP.
So that's an additionality.
But our baseline position in terms of strong
and robust systems, capable people with a lot
of experience in uniform and in suits,
and a lot of existing intellectual property,
which has been tried and tested remains in place.
So we've been here
before, this is a wave that's coming at us,
but we've surfed these waves before
and I'm confident we'll surf it.
Well, again, supplementary.
Yeah. Um, just a supplementary on that.
So, but the difference being that yes,
there is a successful procurement of PA Poseidon
and the implementation,
but what we're looking at is a significant
increase in the procurement capability of the ministry,
but at the same level, if not reduced in terms of resources
and staffing or, but what I think with the committee,
and this is something we've discussed previously as well,
what we are interested in is
with this huge increase in procurement capability,
easier a guarantee from the ministry that you are able to
Follow Through with the Plan.
Well, there
are two answers to that.
I just want to take first of all, your starting proposition.
This is a 15 year plan.
So actually quite a lot of the wave, um, comes
in the course of that plan.
It doesn't all start on day one.
The two biggest things we have to focus on,
the three biggest things perhaps the ministry has
to focus on right now is the introduc, is the business case
and procurement around the replacing the seven five sevens.
That's actually well advanced,
that's been in place for years.
Uh, the second, uh, is the maritime replacement
of the ma maritime helicopters.
The, that business case process is also well advanced.
And the third is the maritime fleet renewal,
which is a multi-year process that will continue
beyond the life of the next four years.
I, beyond the life of budget 25 for which we have been given
more people, quite a lot of what else is being done,
which is not insignificant.
You know, the, the, the javelin and the gats and the,
and the, and the cyber that I would call business as usual
for which we are being funded.
The problem we have with, have had
with those projects has not been people, it's been hash
and this, but this budget has solved the funding problem,
allowing the people we've got to get on with the job
with confidence and CD uh, what I would also add is that,
um, as the secretary
and I, um, own the capability management process together,
um, we're spending quite a bit of time, um, looking at
how we can, um, how we can do more within the system
of the capability acquisition process
with the resources we've got.
Um, I'm concerned that you know, this, this is the,
this DCP that's been announced.
Um, you know, what, what happens in two years if, uh,
the world situation has got worse
and we need to step it up again, how are we going
to accelerate our capability acquisition
process to be able to deal with that?
That might be that we need to double our efforts there.
So we're constantly looking at ways to fine tune it
and, uh, to get more out of it.
You, you could say that that might mean that we need
to shorten some considerations.
We might not need to go as wide on the number of factors
that we look into.
We might need to take a little bit more risk on some
of the acquisition timelines.
Uh, but we're not at that stage yet.
We think we can do it with the, the current program,
but we've got reviews underway internally to guarantee
that we can, and we're pretty confident
we, we will be able to do that.
And if I can take, this is important
'cause we're talking about billions of dollars.
So with your indulgence, Mr.
Chair, I just wanna flesh out some of these answers as well.
So we are focusing on four things.
Sharpen actually sharpen the business cases themselves. Mm.
So the minister's cabinet knows what they're buying
and make that crystal clear.
And you don't have to have long business cases to be sharp.
Uh, in my experience, if I can put it bluntly,
126 pages attached to a cabinet paper,
most ministers gonna read the cabinet paper.
Their offices might read part of 126 pages.
So who are we writing for?
Point number one, sharpen the business cases. Mm.
Point number two, get the business case
process moving at pace.
If you take this on average, the slowest business case
versus the fastest business case, there's nine to 12 months
between the slowest and the fastest.
And we are trying to get that nine to 12 months out,
squeeze it out of the system so that we can be faster.
The third is we want to actually speed up procurement.
And so we are working with MB at the moment, as,
as many government departments are including at ministerial
level, to try and find ways
to make pro our procurement processes faster
and more focused and more up to date
with thresholds than they have been in the past
where a million dollars today is not
what a million dollars was 10 years ago.
All without losing prity all by still ensuring
that this committee and the cabinet
and the taxpayer can be assured that we are, you know, that,
that firms are being held to high procurement
and PR standards
and that, you know, um,
user requirements schedule, uh, and money.
Those three elements are still being sharply focused on,
but we are confident that we can make a good system better.
I think Greg O'Connor.
Yeah, great question. Hey,
you might wanna take your mute off though, or not.
Well, I, I do. You may not. Is that off now?
It is. We can hear you. Thank you.
Uh, minister, um, you comment there about, uh, we are now
or been harvesting the peace dividend.
I wonder if you'd like to be able to sort of elaborate on
that a little as to what the, um,
what the harvest was or has been.
Well, what's really clear is that post the fall
of the Berlin Wall, we
and other liberal democracies around the world decided
that peace had broken out
and no one was gonna be silly enough to go
and do too much more
and cause too many problems in the world.
So what actually happened is that a whole lot
of defense estate got sold off.
Uh, we had defense force moving from about,
it was in about two and a half percent down to one
and a steady drop ever since.
And it's been a,
apart from the few years when we got the p eights and the,
and the um, uh, new, new, uh, Hercules.
So what we ended up with people, uh, deciding
that money could be either spent on other things
or else forgetting
and thinking that we could do without,
you know, some of the decisions.
I look back now and think, how could anyone be so stupid as
to get rid of a strike force capability in the Air Force at
a time when we need it now?
Um, and when, for instance, we lost two frigates as part
of the frigate plan, but instead we got a hundred
and was it five labs or something for the Army?
And that's what we got instead.
I mean, what else stupid could that be?
And the answer is because people thought, oh, here we go.
So it wasn't just that the money got used,
it's the money got used on things
that were totally unnecessary
and where we did need
to have it, suddenly we didn't have it.
So I think what people just felt everyone would be sensible,
but human nature being a this,
not everybody is that sensible. Greg O'Connor.
Okay. So when you say harvest, there was, um,
we we didn't actually end up with a harvest. Um, no, well,
Well, well, well, I think we did,
Did, I mean, we cut You were saying. No,
No, no. I'm, I'm saying,
what I'm saying to you is
that if I look at what's happened to
the defense estate over the years,
it is a very sad story of defense being asked
to fund everybody else's things.
Whether it's treaty settlements, whether it's, uh,
using land to do something else.
I remember that there was even a plan at one stage
or at, to get rid of the Burnham Army camp.
And I was talking to someone
who had been on the select committee at the
time that did that review.
And the thought was, you wouldn't need an army camp in,
in the south island of the size of Burnham.
And of course, what did we have just a little while ago,
10 years ago or so, we had the earthquakes in,
in the Canterbury region, and where was the morgue center?
It was set up at the Burnham camp, and I went
and had a look at it there at the Burnham camp
because nothing was working in the city.
So, you know, we've just gotta be a little bit less
worrying about nickel
and dimming everything, a little bit more thought about
resilience and understanding the, our geography,
but also what happens with our, our, our volcanic nature
that this country has in earthquakes,
but also defense itself.
Uh, if I can Mr.
Then, so the, our, um, peacekeeping forces overseas,
which hadn't really been, we hadn't been really a part of
that they've grown at that same time.
Um, is that something of a quid pro quo there?
No, actually we were, the,
what was changing was the nature of our defense force.
Well, the, the New Zealand Defense Force should never have
been allowed to be in charge
and having to sit outside of MIQ facilities.
And I realized it was a different time when decisions were
made because people felt there was no alternative.
But when I think about the morale drop
and the loss of personnel
and the loss of experienced personnel during that time,
that was the number one thing
that absolutely gutted our defense force.
Now, when I think about peacekeeping, somebody has
to make the peace, that's the problem.
So when we were in Afghanistan,
I can tell you they weren't just there as peacekeepers.
Our special forces were not there going
around holding people's hands.
They may have been sorting out some other things
and helping them to come to a peaceful thought,
but they were certainly not there doing that.
Although our reconstruction team were absolutely involved in
reconstructing and particularly engineering work.
So, you know, the fact is, is
that these are not binary situations.
So peacekeeping is one thing,
but I'd also say to you later in that, in that, uh, decade
of the nineties we had the, the Timor-Leste situation
where New Zealand went in there,
our special forces were in there, our army was in there,
our people were in there, air force
and also, uh, Navy,
our people were there along with the Australians.
And that was one of the first times we've ever done anything
with the Australians by ourselves in
that particular part of the world.
So, you know, someone has to make the peace sometimes.
So, would be fair to say that was adapting
to the situation we had at the time?
Because the question I asked now, clearly
what we've seen in Ukraine is that as each New war does, um,
the rules have changed.
Um, and the question now comes to are, are we equipped
for the change that we are seeing
to become the force we're going to need to be?
Yeah. Um, in that,
I'll start that one new Yeah, yeah, no, I get
what you're meaning and you're dead.
Right? We have to absolutely adapt.
So what you're seeing in, in Ukraine
is you are seeing trench warfare,
you are seeing artillery warfare.
So you're seeing world wars one and two
and three altogether.
You're seeing, and I'm not saying
that there is actually a world wari at the moment
for anything like that, silly, but I am saying you look at
the drone warfare, you look at the, the, the air, um,
supremacy that's absolutely necessary.
You look at all of that and you'd have to say,
there are also opportunities for us to adapt.
And so when I look at,
and part of the DCP you'll see is an acknowledgement
that we have capability in this country, particularly
around, uh, drone
or other UNC crewed vehicles that we already have.
And some New Zealand businesses are selling into, say the UK
to help Ukraine.
We already have some capability
and we have an obligation, I believe very strongly
that we build our New Zealand defense industry.
We won't be building the same things that everyone else gets
to do, but we will be building certain areas where we have
expertise and where we have to be really good.
'cause we have not only the fourth largest search
and rescue area in the world,
and we're a maritime nation with two frigates
and some other ships.
We also have as well, um, the ninth's largest e
and exclusive economic zone in the world,
and a seabed full of minerals and critical earth.
So, you know, we are absolutely, uh, a situation
where we need to adapt.
And you're absolutely right on that.
And given The,
Sorry. No, we'll just come on
the next section of the dcp.
Um, first question under DCP is the honorable penny here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, uh, thank you, uh, minister.
Um, new, and I think it's a great segue when we talk about
the industry, I note Tim Secretary made it in his opening
comments, which speak to, uh, is it in four months time
correctly around the defense
industry strategy? Did I hear that?
That's the plan. Um,
Speak about some might strategy, sorry, some might see
that as cart in front of the horse.
Now it's vc. Well,
we've gotta prepare the industry for the DCP. Oh,
Don, look, I'm gonna, I'm gonna stop you right there.
The industry is so excited about this.
I knew about the industry when I was in opposition.
I was a science, um, innovation and technology spokesperson.
And they are absolutely up for it.
They're already some of them supplying into other countries.
What they can't say when they're out there supplying in
other countries is we supply to NZDF as well.
And that is a real hold for them
because people will say,
why isn't your own defense force buying from you?
So the industry is absolutely up for it.
But I'm gonna pass now to you.
If, if I could just finish my question Yeah.
In the four months ahead of us,
the strategy's due to come out.
Yeah. What can we expect from that strategy?
Is it, and,
and this is your opportunity here, I'm hoping for ambition,
uh, we want to talk about growth and growing this sector.
This is where my question's going to. Yeah.
I hope you can shed some light on that. We here,
Uh, thank you. Uh,
I thank the member for the question.
Uh, let me start with Watson's in scope, the sorts of things
that we are trying to focus on here.
Um, six things.
First to work with industry to see how they can be it to,
you know, forget the, forgive the jargon,
but optimized to support defense,
including in the advanced technology and innovation sectors.
So just dwelling on that for a moment, it's the point
that Mr.
Mr oconnor made, um, which is the nature
of warfare is changing.
And some of that's big innovation
and some of that's small innovation.
And there's certainly, you know,
garage innovators in New Zealand, um,
who are doing really interesting things.
And then taking that to market
and selling as the minister has said, um, to,
to significant militaries.
So, you know, part of the plan is to have a,
a technology accelerator.
We want to try and have this, this notion
of seed money linked to New Zealand industry,
helping New Zealand industry become innovative and,
and technologically advanced.
Secondly, working with industry just to, uh,
review our current models of procurement.
Um, they can, we, we find them slow
and cumbersome and so do they.
And now we don't do everything that industry wants.
You know, we have our own terms, conditions
and probity requirements.
But, but there is a sweet spot here whereby
with the transparency of the defense capability plan plus
a lighter touch to some procurement, particularly
below certain thresholds, I, I think it'll be a win-win
for us as purchases and them as suppliers.
So it's working with industry,
but not only industry to see
how our procurement system can be improved.
Thirdly, trying to build more resilient
and adaptive supply chains.
And it's one of the things that I'm really,
I myself am preoccupied by, which is if something were
to happen in this hemisphere, um, and,
and it doesn't have to be all out conflict, it can just be,
um, uncertainty that stops ships from sailing
in the same way that volcanic eruption can
stop airplanes from flying.
You just need a level of uncertainty.
And we are right at the end of long supply chains
and we want to work with industry to see
what can we sensibly do inside our own territory?
What can industry sensibly do inside New Zealand to,
to strengthen our supply chains?
Thirdly, uh, trying to ensure from the, that some
of the economic return from the DCP that comes back
to New Zealand companies
and it should, it's, it's a, it's a real benefit
of the plan, in turn might help those very industries
to develop their own export capability.
So we can provide money by purchasing
and we can provide money
by a technology, you know, accelerate.
But ultimately if we can purchase more from New Zealand
companies, their balance sheets are better,
they can borrow more, they can themselves develop
and they can start to export.
So it becomes again, a win-win situation.
Fifthly to the member, um, closer procurement,
collaboration, joint procurement
and joint industry, uh, association
with Australia where it makes sense.
Um, and there will be times
where I think we can actually have a common product taken
to market because firms see synergies both in terms
of ideas and capital.
And then finally, uh, other, um, partner
and regional based initiative.
So that's actually in a sense that's trying to ensure
that prime contractors, you know, a lot
of our kit is we buy from large multinational contractors
are not writing small,
but smart New Zealand subprimes out of the equation.
It's trying to look for those synergies, really. Thank you.
Uh, minister, can I just thank you
for a very solid foundation with this DCP.
I think it's setting us up for a strong future.
There's a lot to be done. Uh,
but I know NZDF team are up for it in the context
of industry as well.
We had field days last week, always a great innovation hub.
There's a lot of new stuff going on there.
And with your former head of, uh, science technology,
obviously space is another portfolio.
What would your message be
to these advanced technology companies
that are potentially working in Agritech
or in other industries looking at the DCP from an,
uh, potential opportunity for them
to expand or to diversify?
What's your message to those sorts of innovative
Companies? Well, there are huge opportunities.
So for instance, quite a lot of
what we're talking about can be dual use.
And if I think about, um, and I'll say this
because it's publicly available, a business likes os
that four years ago started in the hangar in toga
and, um, we're building, um, drone, building a drone
that could take 200 kgs.
And they thought, I asked them where their market was,
they thought might be to dock for spraying,
uh, weeds and things.
And now actually they're selling into not only the uk, um,
but that then it's up in Ukraine.
And it's not only that sort of drone, they've also got the,
um, the say the, the, the ship drones.
They've got uncured ships that were boats.
They've got, um, uncurled, you know, land.
So you're seeing enormous opportunities there.
And quite a lot of the technology is dual use.
So I'd say to them
that New Zealand defense forces is very clearly in the
market and they understand that they need
to have an economic growth focus as well.
Um, not only on supply chains, but also growing the economy.
And that message, the message I've given to all the primes,
the prime suppliers, which as you know,
and as the secretary said, only
very large multinational companies, is that you're not going
to get very far if you're not including some New Zealand
contractors in there and suppliers.
So that's your best way forward, is
to help our New Zealand industry grow.
And it's good for the world that New Zealand has something
to add and it's quite significant.
Excellent. Dr. Lauren Nan,
Thank you. Uh, thank
you chair. Um, I have questions around,
because we're now segue to the defense capability plan.
I think I'm looking at hopefully page 12
and 13 on the strategic defense policy.
I just have a number of questions around that, particularly
around national security on the defense interest.
Um, the first one,
national Security protect New Zealand from threats.
What or who and what,
and who are the threats that is being referred to
our defense interest, stable, secure, and resilient region.
What does it actually look like?
What does staple mean in that context?
Um, and the last question,
and we will see, you know, what follows on from that, uh,
strong and effective international rule based order?
International rule, yes. But whose rule?
Well, you, let's start with the,
the last first, whose rules?
It's actually the United Nations.
So we have signed up, for instance, to the, um, the uncross,
the UN's, um, that was the convention, the Law of the Sea.
Um, so yes, we will continue to do that.
It's actually un based.
And the other thing is, we are a liberal democracy.
If we consider that democracy is something worth fighting
for, when it comes to the first questions, who, who are we,
who are threats, what any, anybody who threatens our people
or our assets, I want that really clear.
Anybody who threatens our people, our people are not going
to have to wave a white flag anymore.
They're going to be able to get out there
and protect themselves.
So that is who it is. Anybody.
I don't care who it is, anybody.
And um, and what was the third, second? What The third
One's? Uh, I just
wanna first say thank you so much, minister.
I think that's a really reassuring that like, I really love
that anybody Thank
You, Uh, strong, a stable,
secure, and resilient region.
Yeah. What is, what does that
Look like? You know, I just think like
people should be allowed
to live in their own borders Yeah.
And not have other people come in and take their assets.
That's really important. I'm very aware that we have
in our large exclusive economic zone,
and which is obviously part
of our wonderful Blue Pacific Ocean, we have particularly
amongst those that, particularly South Pacific
small nations that have, uh, already under a lot
of attack from transnational crime criminals.
And also, uh, whether it's drug smuggling
or people smuggling or weapons
and phishing, illegal phishing
and man monitored, those sorts of things.
Their assets are in some cases,
and their sovereignty is being, um, deeply
and badly affected by intrusions from,
whether it's fishing boats or whether it's tours,
or whether it's transnational criminals,
or even things like undersea cables.
Communities of communications are under attack.
Let's just be really clear.
Our Pacific neighbors need us to step up
and do more to help them as well.
And that they also are very happy to work with us.
Whether it's Papua New Guinea
or Fiji, um, Tonga, you know, countries
that have a military force, a defense force,
but which won't have quite, we think we don't have enough.
Um, they actually really do need our assistance
and we are happy to work with them as well.
So I think those are
the sorts of things we're talking about.
There's also geophysical. Oh yes. Weather events. Oh yes.
The geophysical and weather events. You're quite right.
So, um, so, so, um, whether it's, you know,
volcanoes going off around the world, whether it's,
we just had sur see Bali had a, it was,
Indonesia had a Indonesia one just
recently, um, the other day.
Whether it's earthquakes with tsunamis, you know,
our defense force has to go anywhere.
We played a major role, remember that, um,
that Christmas day tsunami
and, um, of Ing day tsunami, Thailand all those years ago.
You know, our, our people are there.
So people expect us to turn up. Yep.
Um, and, you know, we are good neighbors
and we want to make sure that we help them with that.
The other thing I'd be, I will mention to you too, um,
is the issue around seabed mining.
So there are people
who think seabed mining is a great thing,
and there are people who think it's a really bad thing.
The fact is, my view is whatever, if,
if countries have their seed beds, um, mind for minerals
and critical minerals, that they actually need
to have agreed to that
and they need to have something for it.
That's the sort of thing. So some people will say,
we shouldn't do anymore, but
we understand it's already happening.
Right. So I'm really worried about that
because I think that with the race for critical minerals
and resources, our part
of the world which we have tried to have as peaceful
as possible, may well come under even more, more stringent
and strident geopolitical, um, tension.
So it's normally about resources
and that's what's on that ced Next question, Laura.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair, my question's, um, back again
with, um, procurement,
and it's good to hear that you are looking at procurement,
the local industry.
'cause one of the things I hear being the SME spokesperson
for a party is those companies that really struggle
with government between, um,
so I do think there's quite a bit of opportunity there, um,
to help help those guys out.
Um, do you think, given the fact that you've got this tried
and tested system, and you've alluded to the fact
that it is quite, can be quite long, um, in order
to respect taxpayers dollar
and all that kind of thing, do you think it's nimble enough
for procuring new technologies?
And if we think of new technologies, the likes of drones,
the likes of, um, any software, ai, that kind of stuff,
it moves so fast.
And in order to get like the best kind of tech we need
to make sure that we are like, you know, in the game.
And could it be, like, when you think about the drones that,
I'm thinking about what's happening in Ukraine at the
moment, um, it's not always about buying the big
expensive gear.
Sometimes stuff the cheapest smaller gift
is being really effective.
But you, you, you might need to replace it quicker
because it might date.
But I'm just, I'm curious to know
how you're learning from the likes of Ukraine.
I know we're involved with the Drone Coalition, for example.
Um, what you're learning from that
and how you think the procurement will be particularly in
that IT space or fast moving tech
and how the minister might, she might view
how we should be as well, would be quite useful.
You wanna start with that? Thank, thank you.
Thank, thank you for that question.
Um, I wanna start where you started,
which is firms and those small firms.
Um, so in May and June, we held a DCP
and defense procurement industry engagements involving
280 people from 174 companies.
So we're trying to do some of this with
companies, not to them.
And 174 companies.
I can tell you that because we all know this country
and the way of its economy.
Most of 'em are be small. Yeah.
So, so that's, you know, we are trying to really work
and hear and understand
where the rub plates are in terms of procurement.
Um, well, I wanna start on a cautious note and then,
and what I hope is an ambitious note,
the cautious note is we,
we did not have a very robust system for a long time,
and it led us into bad mistakes, like 105 ads, to be frank.
And when this DCP is talking about buying frigates,
and when it's talking about, you know,
billion dollar projects, um, we've got to make sure that,
that, that they are really robustly interrogated.
Mm-hmm. So there are limits, I think, to nimbleness
and agility if you want to keep rigor and, and probity.
But not every project is the same.
Not every project is, is a hundred million dollar,
let alone a billion, let alone a $3 billion project.
So I think there's something, and, and by,
and by the way, not every capability takes 10 years to
look at purchase and introduce into service.
Mm-hmm. And if I can link up, um, Mr.
O'Connor's question with yours, the, the, the nature
of warfare is changing so quickly
that we actually don't want to be locked like some dragonfly
and amber, um, stuck with a technology
where the world has moved, has moved on.
So where I get to is there's something around scale
of purchase and something around type of purchase mm-hmm.
Where the rules, I think can be made
and should be made more flexible, not
for everybody, but for this game.
Mm-hmm. Because I think this game is a particular game.
And, and I think that's where the minister's trying
to pull things and where we are trying to pull, we're
Enter the minister. Do you
think we've got time?
Well, we, we, we don't, well, there's the best time
to start anything was, was about 10 years ago.
Um, so, but we are dealing with what we've got.
And, um, the point is, is that whether it's the newer forms
of warfare, like the drones or the un crude, um,
and all sorts of other electronic, um, means,
the thing is we do have some capability now,
but as the secretary was saying, essentially we need
to have different rules for different size of kit.
Mm-hmm. And, and, and money basically.
So when you're looking at,
and that's something we're working
through right now, is how we do that.
And, you know, normally we don't, we shouldn't have to have
enormous long business cases for, uh, some drones.
Exactly. Um, it's, it is just silly.
And so we need to actually free that up
and trust our people to get on do that.
We are not talking billions in those cases, you're talking,
you know, much more like possibly a
million or something like that.
Mm-hmm. Which sounds a lot to everybody,
but in the defense world, that is relatively smallish.
Exactly. And,
and the other thing is working, one of the things
that defense is doing is trying to work very much
with these industry partners around,
not just talking at them about what we want,
but working with them to find out what, what they can do.
Say this is the problem. Mm-hmm.
Let them come up with solution.
That means that instead of this,
the current situation we have,
which basically means you've got your prototype,
you've got this, you know what you want,
so then you all all have to go to market
so everyone else gets a go at it.
I mean, that is debilitating for any small business
that's trying to pay its bills.
Any start, they just can't compete. Yeah.
And so they get taken out by the prime.
So we've got to change that.
And we are currently getting that sorted, aren't we, Brooke?
It sounds good. We're sorting when can we expect, oh,
we might at the annual review. Can we ask
About Well, you could ask us again.
All right. Sounds good. You'll ask us,
Quite frankly, lemme put it a slightly different way.
If we, if we can use, if I can use this committee to help us
Yeah. Please.
Than what we're trying to achieve, absolutely.
Ask away at the annual review. That would be very helpful.
Okay. Excellent. Alright, Tim
Costley, keep it in mind.
Thank you. Um, I, I wanna ask just a bit about
the capability procurement along the lines of what Mr.
Nan, uh, Dr. Xan asked earlier,
but in the context of, of your comments,
minister about the fact that the world has changed
and it's dramatically different to
what it was in the eighties and the nineties.
Um, there are, you know, imminent pressures that,
that we face, not just in this region, but around the globe.
The, the recent projects, if we look at what, you know,
large acquisition projects have taken, you know, in excess
of 10 years from someone starting a project, uh,
to full capability, I think of aircraft, I think of ships,
I'm not even sure Nui was at full, um,
operating state when we lost her.
Um, and I,
and I appreciate the earlier comments that we have a,
a well test that's been reviewed three times the,
the capability framework and system that we use.
But, you know,
I can recall writing capability definition documents,
which wasted six months and never saw the light of day.
Uh, and, and can we afford to take that long
and to have a world class process if the price doubles
and the capability slightly out of date?
And we were always gonna get a C one 30 J anyway. So why?
So I'm not saying we just go and buy something off the shelf
and crack on, but can we move,
put less focus on arguing over
what we're gonna get when there's only one
or two options for a helicopter on a ship?
And can we put more focus on how we integrate it quickly
and, and use less perhaps, of your resources CDF
with people tied up in capability branch
and more people out ensuring we had a quick integration
and introduction to service so that ensure Yes.
Um, and that, that's exactly what I was getting at
before when I talked about, um,
speeding up the process, keeping it simple.
You know, there's things that might,
there might be obvious choices you have to make.
So why spend a year evaluating, you know,
to the nth degree, all these different options.
The other piece we're looking at now that's a bit different
to where we might have been 10, 20 years ago is we are,
we are, instead of years gone
by when we're looking at a capability,
we'd make sure it lasts 30 years
and has optionalities on it that can cater
for the changing environment
and different technology shifts and things like that.
Which, you know, we've done with some
of our even more recent capabilities these days,
we are saying, what is the minimum viable product to field
to our troops, our sailors, soldiers, aviators as quickly
as possible to meet the threat coming this way?
Keep it minimum, keep it viable,
but make sure that there perhaps you, there are options
to upgrade it later if, if a new technology
or a new innovation comes along.
So keep it simple, keep it quick, keep it lean.
S she wants to add, look, I'd only say a couple of things.
I think we're all in the same space here.
But there is a, but we don't just buy, let's just say steel.
We also need advice to government that
and to the NZDF actually, which is about infrastructure
and workforce and crewing standards
and new levels of training
and new level, a new kinds of doctrine
and how it might be interoperable with partners.
So even when you buy something which is relatively a no
brainer, frankly, there's still stuff that needs
to be inter issues that need to be interrogated to ensure
that when we do introduce something into service, we've got,
we've got all the moving parts and ready to go.
The second point is just to underscore your sense
of impatience or urgency, which we share, uh,
the demand queue is growing
the longer it takes us to lodge an order,
someone else has got their place in the queue before us.
And some of the stuff takes three years.
So, you know, you lose your place in a queue
and you are not losing a place in a
queue, you are losing time.
So that's one of the reasons why we, uh,
I think on this bench, all
of us are feeling some sense of urgency.
But, you know, part of my job if I can be, you know,
frankly, is to make sure
that I do not wanna be the secretary who in three or four
or five years time causes your successes around this table
to say, we knew we couldn't trust you
and folk to bloody get your way out of a paper bag
because look at the mistakes you've made.
So we've gotta find the sweet spot between rigor,
confidence, and pace.
I, I understand that. And, and I guess the second half,
and I appreciate we drifting towards readiness
and operations, but, and we don't wanna have another 105
labs that we park up and then sell off.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh,
but the, the, the, the, the point you make about the,
you know, people are a big part of capability and, and,
and CDF perhaps a question for you,
but if, if World War I, I guess the question is,
and I've heard Australians asked this,
if World War III starts tomorrow, uh,
it is the current training pathway to generate capability.
We, we spoke earlier about the number of ships
that we can't manage, and even if we bought twice
as many tomorrow, we can put 'em to sea.
But is what we are doing today, is that
how we would train people if we were in, in world three?
I mean, the, the, the minister used the example of, of, uh,
1943 before, in, in, in,
in the difference in context at the time.
But are we, I appreciate we want
to have the absolute highest standards with everyone
and all that we do, but,
but are, are we really generating people
and recruiting them as quickly as we could?
And do we have a plan for
how we double the size of our military?
So you're right again, that,
that the way we have been over training, we have been going
for a hundred percent, um, where all
of our service chiefs are looking at the moment is
how can we speed up that training pipeline by generating
to the actual level you need to do the job.
It, it is a common, it is a common, uh, view
that we're all taking at the moment faster.
The other, the other bit is looking at
what we can do with say Australia.
So we're gonna be dealing with threats in our region.
We're gonna be dealing with them with Australia.
So how can we have more commonality with Australia
and our training, our operating,
our capabilities, our interoperability?
And these are all common features that we might get
to later in the, in the, uh, discussion
around, you know, initiatives.
But the other half was the bit
before that, like getting people in the door.
And I'll stop going back to World War ii,
but look at the soldiers we training to go to Ukraine.
Yeah. Look at how quickly they need to generate people.
Do we? Yep.
Can you give us some confidence that there's a plan
that says if we need to increase personnel numbers,
we've got the plan to deliver that?
Yes. And you'll see that in fashion in the,
our workforce strategy when that's released in a few months.
Okay. Penny, he, um,
Just if I may, Mr.
Chair back to the DCP part, just to close
that area or section off.
Yes. Um, we spoke of the maritime dcp, sorry,
we spoke of the maritime helicopter project.
Very excellent. When can we see one?
When, when, when can New Zealanders expect to see, see one?
You can see an old one today.
We've got old ones. Well, it's going
through a process right now.
Okay. So you'll see some announcement sometime soon.
Not quite the same as the helicopter,
but it's an announcement.
Well, one thing I would say is the DC has has
got money attached to it.
So that's one of the, so when Mr.
Costley talks with the frustration, she felt writing things
that went nowhere This time we've got the money.
He was good at it though, right. Finally,
It's Time we Got money.
Danica
Makes all difference.
Absolutely. Thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, uh, my question, uh, around DCP is around, um,
space capability
and I note, uh, that there is a, um, a cost in the,
or a, an item in the budget for between 300
and $600 million in space capability.
Uh, so my question really is, uh, um, how will
that be developed and what, what areas
of space policy in particular are we,
are we looking at for that spent?
Uh, well, I'm gonna call them Sarah as well on space,
but it's, it is, it is essentially, um,
the New Zealand defense forces behind the curve
of like militaries when it comes to space.
There's something about situational awareness.
So there's something about using space, uh, capabilities
to give us more oversight in our own EZ.
Mm-hmm. And as the minister has said, it's a vast space.
And even with, uh,
and with two frigates, uh, it's not really, uh,
at the moment being surveilled in the way in a military
sense that we would it to be.
Mm-hmm. Secondly, if you have space,
you also need ground stations.
Uh, so there's going to be some investment there.
Uh, thirdly, it's to develop our own
human capital when it comes to space.
So it's actually training
and making those international connections.
And although that range looks like a lot of money and,
and it is a range because, so it could fall anywhere inside
that range, we try not to give too much away.
That's commercially sensitive. Yes.
Um, you, you go, you run through money in a space
environment quite quite quickly.
So I just want to temper expectations really about this,
this first bite at space.
It's trying to get some basics in place.
It's trying to get some basic infrastructure in place
and basic human capital in place and some,
and some basic kit in place from which we can then grow.
So we are, we are trying to walk before we can run here.
And I think, you know, if we look at the space portfolio,
our space industry,
even if it is third in the world last year
before successful, verifiable vertical launches into space.
Wonderful. It's almost entirely Mahi Peninsula
is almost entirely civilian.
And, um, and so
of course we've got a growing aerospace industry as well
where there's quite a lot of dual use there.
So I think the point is, is that we are
behind the eight ball in terms
of using space from a surveillance point of view.
Mm. And we need to do more.
So if you think about, say, you know, I've vast search
and rescue area as well.
Well, so you've got to, I mean,
drones can do certain things, space can do certain things,
but you still need people in a ship to go and pick people up
or a helicopter off that ship to go
and get someone outta the water.
You've still got to have that.
So it's not just, it's an end, it's an and
and it's not a one or the other.
Yeah, sure. But you can possibly locate people faster, um,
than you can otherwise.
And then you can go and direct the resources there rather
than wandering around the Pacific looking for people.
Yeah. So that's the sort of thing I understand.
I can't think of another nation such as New Zealand
that is such a maritime nation, that
that is actually more dependent on space than we are now,
let alone in the future.
So whether it's communicating, um, seeing, sensing, um,
helping make decisions, it's only be,
can become a bigger, a bigger deal.
Brilliant. Um, can I just say one thing
before, um, it's not a question, it's just a comment really,
but I was, um, at the Gisborne RSA, uh, at the beginning
of the week, and um, they had a couple of former, um,
air Force, um, personnel there who said about,
would I please pass on how delighted they were
with the defense capability plan and please get on with it.
And they loved it and it couldn't come soon enough.
So I'm just doing my good, my good job.
That's right. And our supplement.
Good. Yeah. Just a quick, um, supplementary on that.
When can we expect our own constellation?
Oh, well do, what will we call, do you think,
for Constellation, Judith?
I dunno about that. I dunno the answer.
And maybe it should be the Judith one. Okay.
Let's rephrase it. Since it's such an old name,
no one else ever gets called Judith these days.
Maybe we'll give it to Constellation.
Very good. All we, we'll move along
to defense readiness and operations.
Uh, the next section there, Mr. Resident, your Honor.
Will any, uh,
Thank you Mr. Chair
readiness?
Look, uh, we, we've made mentioned in this, uh, session
this afternoon about the changing world
and we see it all over the news, et cetera.
Our readiness and ability, uh,
and of course, meeting the cost to deploy
is a significant challenge and something minister
and cabinet government will have to consider.
So my question is, uh, with respect to the,
are we prepared, as possibly has already mentioned, um,
in this growing strategic challenge
that we see it's happening every day, different places,
different spaces, and are we prepared to go committed?
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Um, so the, if you look at preparedness, um,
I'll say straight off the bat, um, due to attrition, um,
coming, coming down,
but it's, it's left us, um,
comparative comparatively ill prepared compared to
where we might've been, um, pre COVID.
Um, what that means is that, uh,
it doesn't mean we don't have options.
We've always got options. And if you look at
when have we failed to respond to a situation
with something, I, you know,
I can't call us not being able to do that.
What it means in terms of lack
of preparedness at the moment is the degree
of notice we need to respond, the amount
of operations we can do concurrently.
We might be dealing with a scenario here
and another one over here.
So we're limited, we're limited there to where we need to be
and the duration of those deployments, um, you know,
whether we can go through two
or three locations on a, on a peacekeeping mission,
for instance, that is growing.
Uh, at the moment we're making, uh, good inroads into that.
But, um, to be completely honest, you know, we,
we are down a bit on our readiness at the moment.
That doesn't mean we can't respond, it just means
that it might take us an extra day to get there.
We might need, might not be able
to cover three locations at once,
and we might not be able to stay for nine months.
It might only be six months.
If I may just supplementary with respect to
specific deployment, uh, we've, um,
supported securing trade routes mm-hmm.
Um, uh, around the world
and the recent deployment, uh, those trade routes have now,
uh, increased and opened up significantly.
Last check, I think was about 68% improvement
of trades coming through there, uh,
through those particular routes.
Uh, is there a desire to continue to keep, uh,
a focus on that deployment? Which, which one
In particular? You're
talking about the
Red Sea area? Correct.
Okay.
So, so we redeployed back from the Red Sea in terms of,
you know, we were there to keep, to protect the trade
that was flowing through to stop loss of life at sea
and to uphold the international rules
and no costs, um, that mission finished, um, last year.
So we're not there presently. Okay.
Thank you. In relation to
the readiness from a personnel perspective,
how are we tracking with recruitment, obviously fantastic
to see attrition down to 6.8%.
It's, uh, significant improvement
and we'll have a meaningful impact going forward.
We've lost a lot of those people,
so we need to build back up.
How do we, how are we tracking with recruitment, both
of new people, but potentially returning personnel as well?
Mm-hmm. We have more people ready to, to join waiting
to join than, uh, we can afford
to let through the gates at the moment.
Um, with the recent announcement
for Fantastic Uplift, fantastic.
And budget for next year, we'll be able to, uh,
open those gates more than we have for the last few years
and, and start growing those numbers back.
And so what sort of percentage increase do you expect?
I'd have to ask training chief people officer about the,
the recruiting, uh, percentages.
But I, in terms of the dcp,
we're gonna be growing the defense force by about two
and half thousand people.
Um, which is around, you know, 20% over the next,
over the course of the dcp.
So 15 years.
But what we need to be ready for
is growing the defense force a lot more than
that should the situation.
And so making sure that we have a recruiting system
that can respond
and grow the people a lot faster than we
traditionally have is really important.
And, and that is part of the, uh,
workforce strategy as well.
And you'll be fully aware that people will complain
that it takes an awful long time to be recruited
and for particularly younger people
that they may well have found
something else to do in that time.
And that is a real loss.
And of course, everyone who has
to come into NCDF certainly in, in, um,
in the services are expected to be perfect physical
and mental, um, examples of, of, um, new Zealanders.
Mm-hmm. And so the, it is actually need, we need
to be much smarter at it and much faster.
And also to point out that, you know, there's actually,
they're starting a pretty good salary for a 19-year-old
or an 18-year-old and, um, with three medical and dead
and, um, and subsidized accommodation,
but about what's now 72,000 start on 68,000
Minimum adult wage, plus the military component
Plus the military component, which is
67,000.
Really? Mm-hmm. All those watches.
So when you hear people saying,
we don't get paid much, oh, well actually you do.
And plus free dental and health
and subsidized accommodation and food.
The the other, the other part
of your question was about bringing people back. In the
Meantime, we have people coming back to us from our near
neighbor and closest friend.
Well, that's the easiest way to grow
that capability, right.
Hanging up to those NA ranks. Yeah.
They're actually just coming back in.
And just to qualify that, we need to be really careful
that we don't, you know, we,
we are in this together of Australia.
We, we've gotta make sure that we're not, um, attracting,
taking, you know, robbing Peter
to PO poaching Paul or poaching people.
And, um, that's something that chiefs on both sides
of the Tasman talk about is, is safeguarding
and making sure that it's controlled and, and fear,
because we all need the same people.
I think they were coming, going
to the civilian site like them in
Australia, now they're coming back.
I can think of some examples.
And also there's no snakes when we go train in New Zealand.
Thank you. Supplementary, Mr.
Chair, just to that the workforce at large,
we've spoken particularly about the, um, the uniformed,
uh, workforce.
Uh, um, is there any view in the upcoming workforce
retention plan and recruitment to growing civilian
Roles that have been change
that's taken place over the past 12
Months? Civilian roles
are really, really important.
Uh, what, what we need at the moment
with the security environment though,
is people we can deploy on operations combat.
And that's what we're really short of at the moment.
Um, we're just coming down from quite a high percentage
of civilian civilians in the organization, um, to
where we've been historically over the decades.
You know, we, at one point we hit 27%
of our workforce was civilian.
Um, at the moment we've got ships tied up that can't go
to sea because we haven't got the sailors.
Um, we've got, um, people
that are going on their fifth deployment overseas
because we don't have the number of soldiers.
We've got joint force headquarters out at Trenton with,
with watch floors that can't be filled
because we haven't got the uniform people with those skills.
So we need those, um, the, the the,
the money is tight still, even with uplifts.
Um, what we need to do is trade off some
of the civilian workforce to, to, to rem militarize,
um, to make sure we've got combat capable
deployable workforce.
And that's the process we're going through.
Uh, at the moment, we can't afford to have both high number
of civilians and, uh, and, and to grow our defense.
That's a trade off from one to the other.
And it's not only the military
and conflict wise, is it, it's in these things like,
uh, cyclo and Gabriel.
I mean, it's the uniform staff
who are deployed out to do that.
And in fact, I think the collective contract with the,
with the civilian staff, that they're not allowed
to be deployed on those things.
So, you know, under the union rules. So,
You know, look, um, I just wanna be clear,
we're not diminishing the role
of civilians in the workforce.
You want to come and go out, they're absolutely important.
Um, uh,
that we've gotta make sure we've got the balance right.
10 plus, Just to follow up on that, it's fantastic
to hear that rebalancing.
'cause you know, we need people that can deploy.
Is there a way that the, the remaining civilians you're left
with can be deployable at least in a, in like a Haer context
or I, I know this government's not gonna send people
to guard hotel doors, but,
but when there are challenges
that do not have maybe a military threat, is there some way
that they can be used to at least relieve some pressure so
that those in uniforms can contractors you?
You'd hope so, but there are, there are some restrictions
and impediments to that, that, you know, quite frankly,
we need to try and work through, uh, for the future.
Um, whether they're legal, whether they're part
of their contract, you know, we saw during COVID, we tried
to get, uh, to ease the burden on our uniform force.
We tried to enable it for civilians to be able to do that.
And it, um, that was problem challenge
You. No. Mm-hmm.
So the answer is people in uniform, right?
Yeah, exactly. But also, I mean, the chief
of defense force is being much more mild than me,
but, um, it's much more circumspect.
But you know, to be frank, um,
our uniform staff shouldn't have to do all those jobs.
And when you've got, when you've got civilian staff who want
to help and who are prevented from doing so,
that is simply not right.
And they were trying to help in some
cases and it's just not fair.
So we do need to rebalance
and the reason is we need deployable people
and CDF has to front up the people.
I guess I was thinking of examples like Fox, Fox River,
when it washed out the rubbish dump, um,
shoveling up oil on the to, on beaches
after Rena, that, that kind of thing
that then means you can send your deployable guys.
Yep. I, I think there are a lot
of civilians in the organization that want to do that.
And during COVID, I, I was inundated with people wanting,
saying, you know, can I go
and do my turn on the, on the MIQ?
Um, but we just couldn't, couldn't get the role set.
Appreciate. That's alright.
Dr. Lauren, thank you.
Um, that actually ties in really well
with, I've got two questions.
One, kind of domestic on one international,
but looking at operations, so I'm looking at,
let's say on page 85 of Vote Defense Force.
I really believe that in terms of domestic staff minister
you mentioned about preparedness for emergencies, for, um,
for natural disasters and et cetera.
But what I see is there's been a cut budget
to assistance civil power
and provisions of a public service in emergency situations.
In fact, there's only been a 0.05% increase of the total
appropriation for protection
of New Zealand and New Zealanders. Yeah.
And I guess a lot of, a lot of what defense does,
if you're taking say our engineers, a lot
of their skills are transferrable across
into civilian anyway.
So it's things like, you know, roads going, taking out
and bridges going and all those sorts of things, isn't it?
But perhaps the transactions,
Your question that the number is reduced, well,
The budget reduction could be due to like
what minister said, just a level of margin
of error sharing of resources.
But I guess the fundamental question is,
considering the budget hasn't increased,
in fact it has decreased, are we looking at
preparing ourselves for emergency
and natural disasters in a better way knowing
that things are happening all the time?
It's a tiny little, Our numbers go up
and down every year, to be honest, I'm not sure
of the magnitude of this one, but I can tell you there's,
there is no intent to reduce the amount of support
to you are talking about. Is
It fair say That
That number varies based on activities
that are happening. For example,
Cycling That comes through one year will lead increase
in funding for year drop off 1.5 million.
I think here that something that's all good.
Then my second question is,
so when you are looking at defense, uh,
and international engagement, that's the one
that actually increased a reasonable amount
that we're looking at maybe about $11 million.
Um, I just wanna check that we've NZDF
personnel for the, the Russia, Ukraine war
and also for the Russia's invasion
of Ukraine shouldn't be a need.
What I haven't seen is, um, would
and the DF deploy personnel in support of
Palestine in the current Israel Palestine constant
That I'll leave to my, uh, colleague from the Ministry
of Defense around those.
Well, mind you, those decisions are made by by cabinet
by cabinet, not by defense force.
Defense Force doesn't have the luxury of getting
to go wherever they feel like any time, unfortunately.
Um, but no, there's been a matter for cabinet. Yeah.
But should there be a need,
there is a preparedness already.
New Zealand has been involved I until in the Middle East
for 110 years,
but I'm sort of hoping that we won't be having
to do too much more there.
Yes, Very good. Uh, Greg O'Connor. Sorry, online.
Alright. Uh, thank you.
I think I've got my voice this time.
Um, in relation to you talking about civilian support, um,
it's always been recognized that
to put a soldier in the field as a certain formula of, um,
of people you need supporting them, um,
is is there such a sort of formula now is,
or broadly speaking as to for every frontline
or regarded frontline position, there needs to be
so many support roles.
Do you have a formula on that?
I, that, that would, I mean, to be honest,
looking at the vast number of roles we have
that go into the field, i i, there is not one formula
or ratio to support the whole NZDF.
It would depend on which trade
or branch you're talking about, which service,
which operation, what equipment are they operating.
Um, and, and I would say it changes over, over time as well.
You know, various technologies, different ways
of doing things, whether we outsource some of that support,
um, to, to contractors both in New Zealand and overseas.
So, no, I I'd have to say that there isn't a,
there isn't a general figure of civilian to uniform
field deployments that I'm aware of.
Well, well just given that then,
and the fact that we are reducing the number
of civilian personnel, um, does that mean
that you're inevitably going to have
to put uniform personnel doing jobs that
previously were done by civilians?
If you're talking about deployments,
it's generally uniform people that deploy.
That's what I mean. Yeah.
So given that, um, you said there is no formula,
but we, what we want, the one certainty in this formula is
that we are reducing the number of civilian personnel.
Yes. Um, then does your flexibility then be
considerably reduced and you're gonna have
to use more uniform personnel
to do jobs previously done by civilians?
It, there is a small element of that,
but I, what I would point out is that the number
of civilians we have in the NZDF today is far higher than
what it was in 2012 when we were doing a lot
more operations.
So basically we need to, we overcompensate.
Does, does that make sense?
So we, we, we, in 2012,
we had 2554.9 civilians.
The level of flying sailing deployments we had on at the
time was, was vastly more than we have today.
But in today's NZDF, we have just under 3000 civilians.
What we're trying to do is to, um, through our,
our program that's been running over the last six months is
to rationalize that we are trying to turn off, um,
uh, pieces of work good programs within the NZDF that we,
that have civilians attached to them
that we just cannot afford at the moment
because we need to divert
that money into our uniform personnel
who need to deploy into the field.
And was the, um, attrition rate about the same for
civilians as it was for uniformed staff?
The, the, the civilian rates, um, don't match.
So during, if you, if you look at the last six years,
particularly during COVID, the number
of civilians grew during that period.
The number of civilians has grown steadily since 2012.
And we were, um, around 3,250, I think is the,
the peak with,
with a lot more civilians in the pipeline to come in.
Um, at the time when the number of uniform people,
the attrition was, you know, over 15%
and we were losing uniforms all over the place.
Now, some of that is good
because we were using civilians then to fill some
of the jobs that uniforms were doing,
uniforms we no longer had because the attrition was so high.
Now that we've stopped attrition, we need to find a way
to afford recruiting more uniforms
and we are simply going to trade off.
We're gonna reverse the ization we've gone
through over the last 15 years, reverse that and,
and rem militarize the defense force
And have more uniforms doing jobs that maybe were done
by civilians in say, the last,
in the last 10 years. Anyway.
No, I didn't Say that. I think it's really important
to remember we've got half of our navy ships tied up
because you don't have enough crew.
Mm. And those crew are not civilians, so it's that bad.
That's what we're fixing. Any No, thank
You Mr. Chair. Um, there's
been a matter
that this committee has been, um,
we raised certainly in the last two
and a half, which is Operation Respect.
Uh, it's something that I know, uh, the defense, uh,
quite proactive on.
Uh, however, I do recall in the annual review, um,
that we would, that, uh, I think we do an update,
if you will, and I'm offering the opportunity here, um,
minister, CDF, uh, on an update on do staff. Mm-hmm.
Of respect. Yep. Okay. Um, thank you.
Um, so we were asked about off respect at the, uh, hearing,
uh, six months ago.
And the questions I had from, uh, member then were
around commitment and resourcing,
and I said, um, we have a full commitment, uh, to
that program across our, uh, entire organization.
Um, what I couldn't guarantee was
that the resourcing wouldn't be subject
to the same competition for scarce resources as,
as hundreds of other programs.
So that's what I said. Then since then,
we've had another audit by the Auditor
General, um, completed.
And that was in December,
and I believe the Auditor General wrote to, wrote to ick,
um, just to say, uh, just to summarize the outcomes of
that audit, which were that, um, uh,
pleasing progress made by, uh,
the Defense Force from that audit.
Um, and I'll I quote, um, in my view,
the NZDF has identified what it needs to create in terms
of long-term sustainable change,
which will address the drivers
of harmful behavior over time.
The new op RESPECT strategy,
the NZDF has reset op respects direction
and makes a clear case for how op respect will create a,
the safe and cohesive teams
and work environments that are needed
for operational effectiveness.
Um, it then goes on to, um, to talk about progress in terms
of recommendations from the previous audit
that were done in 2023, uh, 11 recommendations there,
five are completed, six are still in progress, some of 'em,
you know, nearly completed.
Um, and then since then we've got, um,
I've got more details if you should,
you want them on other initiatives that we've started
around op respect.
I, we are still in the same position though.
Um, the commitment is high, the progress is good.
Um, the, the, the resourcing of that is, is still going
to be, uh, problematic.
But let me be clear, we've got lots of people tied to
that program, specifically to that program,
and there's a lot of, uh, funding.
I'm talking, you know, millions of dollars going into
that, uh, prospect program.
So it's still not enough.
But, um, we need
to spend money on fuel ammunition and other things as well.
I personally don't understand why people can't just expect
to work in a workforce that's right.
Where everyone is treated with a level of respect
that they would expect themselves.
I don't see any reason why it has to be a big deal.
Everyone should be able to go to work
and come home feeling not being sexually abused or harassed
or bullied or whatever.
And that's just generally basic decency, isn't it?
So I think that we all agree, you know,
shouldn't shouldn't be a big problem,
shouldn't be a big program, but unfortunately every now
and again, everyone has to reset their work environment
and know, just treat people decently. Yep.
The success of this program is, is key
to the future of our workforce.
You know, we need to attract people
who are gonna come into a safe environment.
Minister said, uh,
the first thing they're gonna check whether they join any
organization is, um, how respectful
and safe will I be in this, in this place, this place
that deploys to all different parts of, of the world.
Next question. I think you can see if people know
that there is a zero tolerance, that sort of behavior,
and that's, uh, and you've seen, you'll see from time
to time, um, in public comments
and media reports on various disciplinary action defense
takes it very seriously.
Fair enough. Our next question will be Lawrence Nan
and then we'll move on to the, uh, defense estate section.
Thank you so much. I actually just have one question on
sort of, I guess operations and defense readiness.
One of the things, minister that you have done recently was
to endorse the Golden Dome Project. I
Don't think it needs to be an endorsement.
Okay, I'll rephrase That. Um, a
Conversation was had around the golden, I guess,
in terms of that defense project.
I, but what I don't see is any budget within
both Vote Defense.
It has nothing to do with us. I mean, it's a us um,
uh, entity, not us.
And, um, you know, the question was asked was essentially,
this is a Shang dialogue question from the floor,
essentially, was this all going to add to nuclear, um,
the growth of proliferation, basically?
And I said, well, I, I know how hard it is
to get defense money.
Let me tell you, people don't, you know, for Minister
of Defense here, who knows how hard it's,
you try your best, you do what you can.
You don't spend money, get money and spend it
because you just feel like it, you do it
because you feel there's a need for it.
So I see it at the time, it's wasn't
that we are endorsing, oh, we're not part of it.
It's just basically, um, the US is up to able
to use their own money their own way.
But I would say to people, calm the farmer a bit here.
People don't spend that money
unless they feel there's a need for it.
You know, there's always like, um,
sometimes I think about the, the excellent work
that our defense does, um, around, you know, um,
fisheries helping out NPI
and uh, also customs around, um, illegal shipments
and fishing, you know, all that sort of stuff.
And I think in our own little way with our king ear
and the work we're gonna do around satellites,
we'll have our own little power dome,
but it will be mostly, mostly around power
In terms of what you're saying, minister.
And I think with what, um, Brooke, you mentioned
before in terms of the defense cap, um,
capability plans in there, there's a space capability, but,
but all of those are perspective Yeah.
Which is why we haven't seen it in this. Yeah,
Yeah. Yeah. And we, we are talking
and we're talking about our ure, so, which is also
around ca you know, getting people when they're,
when their boats capsized them somewhere in the Pacific
as opposed to sending out a frigate to try and find them.
Um, or even a P eight A beside, which is actually very good,
but is there a drone
or is there a satellite capability
that would be cover a lot bigger area
and that would be a little paradigm,
but it would be very, it would not be offensive in any way.
Very good. Alright, coming on to defense, the state honor.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Um, the housing Woden,
it's Matter News recently
and expressed my disappointment. Do you wanna come,
Do you wanna come here for that one and I I will exit out.
Fine. Continue. Just,
We'll just do a change of the chair.
Sure. Switch there just in case.
I Thank you. Please do proceed.
Um, and, and it's just an opportunity
to find an update moving forward.
Um, it it's a significant piece of, of the infrastructure.
Yeah, indeed. Um, thank you very much
to the member for this question.
Good afternoon all. Um, certainly in terms
of the defense base infrastructure, um, just if I can, um,
place a general comment around that, um, is, um,
the minister noted earlier in terms
of the peace dividend having, um, been exhausted, um,
including in relation to accommodation
and other facilities and defense infrastructure.
It's been the case that, um,
over successive governments over a large number of years,
uh, you know, frankly, maintenance and,
and new build activity hasn't taken place that should have.
Um, we are working hard to rectify that in the case of, um,
specifically, um, discussions continue about the way
that we can best achieve that.
Um, and obviously the army
and defense, uh, more generally needs to be cognizant
of various, um, obligations
and opportunities, um, including the geographical location,
uh, you know, the lack of relative lack
of industry in the area, um, and,
and additional complexities around procurement.
Um, that, that, um, introduces along with, um, obligations
and again, opportunities with, um,
treaty TGI settlement partners
and locally we more particularly, um,
and so, uh, the government's committed
to providing good accommodation options in, uh,
and discussions continue about the best way
that we can achieve that in a timely fashion respecting, um,
value for taxpayer money, uh, in a way that will see
how people appropriately housed.
Can I ask something entry to that?
Obviously it's something dear to
Minister Collins heart, uh, which is pop.
Oh. Um, it, it, it's, it's a, it's great announcement.
It's a vicious plan, but we do know
that costs are challenges in Auckland.
Wonder if the minister wouldn't
mind have been up update. Yeah.
Thank, thank you for the opportunity.
And, um, the local member of Parliament may, may wish
to add a comment as well,
but, um, certainly in terms of Papa Kura and,
and the valuable, um, work that is, um, undertaken
for New Zealand, uh, by those who are, um, living
and working in that place, we, we recognize the need
to have better accommodation than has been the case
over a number of years.
Um, I was very pleased to be able
to attend an occasion at which, um,
some new accommodation was opened.
Um, and it's part of a more general program,
and I do acknowledge, um, seated
behind me the defense state infrastructure team who have,
um, committed to continuing to work through that program at,
at both of the bases we've referred to
and a couple of others besides.
Um, and certainly, uh, a, a key aspect
of the defense capability plan, um, as I saw it, as
as delivered by the minister and, and as the secretary
and CDF and others have touched on.
Um, obviously not only supporting operational outcomes, uh,
but of course, um, supporting our people,
which in turn does support the operational outcomes
to the extent that it becomes easier to recruit
and retain personnel who are, you know, we are asking
in reasonable conditions as opposed
to those which have assisted, uh, for far too long.
They tell me they're very happy with.
Good, great.
Um, minister, just wondering, obviously with a need,
we're looking to grow the force, there's a lot
of regeneration to do with the estate as well.
I'm wondering if you can give us any insights into
conversations you may have had
with the Building construction minister about
how we might be able to more effectively deliver some
of those solutions, perhaps
with offsite manufacturing techniques
or any other mechanisms that may enable more prompt
and cost effective delivery.
Yeah, well, th thank you very much.
Um, having, um, uh, worked very, very closely
with the Ministry of Building Construction, um,
and those in industry more importantly, um, I know
that there are a lot of, uh, building techniques
in the modern age that are appropriate to use, uh, not only
to, um, speed up delivery, reduce cost,
and have other benefits, for example,
in the offsite manufacturing world, um, uh, provides ease
of consenting processes
where large scale repeatable designs are being constructed
offsite and then delivered onto defense spaces.
But more particularly in an environment where, uh,
security is important, um, obviously contractors are,
are able to, um, obtain, uh, the relevant clearances
as need be, uh, but to minimize disruption.
And also for that security element, it's helpful to have,
uh, construction taking place offsite
and brought into an area
and simply delivered, obviously at that point.
Uh, infrastructure is connected for various utilities
and services, but, um, I think that that, um, within, um,
the, the crown's obligations in terms of defense estate just
as it is, um, in, um, education
and other aspects of government procurement, um,
provides a way ahead for us to deliver much more quickly
as well as more affordably, uh, the housing
and other solutions that we need.
And just on housing, um, we note of a recent government,
uh, announcement with respect to all fibers used in,
is there a commitment from defensive do the same
and any of their housing estate developments?
Yeah, I, I know the government's very, um, um, interested,
um, across government in such questions.
And of course, the, the obvious point needs to be made that,
that these are, um, questions finally balancing, um, value
for taxpayer money and,
and the opportunity costs
that would be incurred if there are more expensive solutions
in terms of the number of units
or lots that one can afford for the same, uh,
taxpayer dollar in terms of defense, um, procurement, um,
specifically in the space, I'm not aware of anything that's,
uh, yet been concluded that would mirror
that announcement in relation to Kor uh, homes,
but if, um, if that is the case on the other hand,
I'm sure it'll be corrected quickly enough.
Yeah. Yes, we are, we, we will be looking at that.
We've got, um, got nearly 300 homes over the next year
or so that we can come online.
Can you hear us? You come up here, mark.
Sure. Use yourself as well.
The answer is yes. Uh, we will be looking at,
we've got nearly 300 homes over the next, um, year with the,
uh, injection from Budget 25, which represents about 20%
of the housing stock for NZ ds.
We're making progress. We've got a long way
to go, but we are getting there.
And, uh, certainly that will be looked at as well
as the type of, um, floor coverings.
And for the record, can you just give your name?
Oh, sorry. Mark Gruson.
I'm the head of the state and infrastructure.
Right. Thank you.
Now other questions are on defense estate.
Right. Okay. We'll come to the final general questions.
Uh, we have still a few minutes available if there were any
other questions we didn't have the opportunity to get
to earlier on. Honorable Penny.
Um, I noted the, in the budget, uh, the appropriation
for the tribunal claim Y two 500,
um, progress on that.
'cause it's for,
It's before the tribunal, isn't it?
Yeah. So I don't think we can say anything about that.
It's before the tribunal.
Yeah. I just wonder if there's, uh, uh,
the, the meetings went well.
I saw they, they were recently on the Devonport Marae.
Mm-hmm. And are there any more coming up? Mm-hmm.
Um, so it, that's going pretty well, uh, considering the,
the coup has been going for 10 years now.
Um, we're in a quite an intensive phase where, uh,
we've held, um, uh, two wanting a one,
one in and one at Davenport.
Uh, the next one will be at tour
and Waiwai I in, um, in o Haki in August.
And that will, that will basically conclude,
uh, the tribunal.
We've had great turnout from our people.
Um, I think the tribunal has been very pleased
with the interactions I've had with those that have appeared
before the tribunal.
Um, I know our people are getting a lot out
of it in, in two ways.
You know, we are there to listen and learn
and, um, make sure we incorporate all the learnings, um,
and listen to what the tribunal has to say at the end of it.
Um, I can't comment on how they think it's going.
Um, but I, you know, it's,
it's going really well from our, from our perspective.
Cool. Um, thank you GI just have a question for, uh,
'cause we didn't get enough time before, so,
but now we, we do, um, a question for the minister around
what we mentioned before in terms
of the defense capability plan.
I guess two questions. The first one being, um, I,
like I said before, I really appreciate the minister's
response around the fact, if anyone is what contradicts
or anyone's challenging New Zealand's interest in a lot
of things, what happens if it's an ally
of New Zealand who does that?
We only have one formal ally and that's Australia.
Well, I'd give them a very good telling,
offer a start, Lawrence.
Yeah. And I think we'll be fine. Okay.
On the phone to Richard Miles
and say, don't you dare do that.
I'll be fine. Look, we work very closely together. Yeah.
But they're our only formal ally.
That's Freddy. Good to know.
That's really good context. Thank you. And he gives
A good telling off. Um,
And I guess the second thing was just something
that I think, Brooke, that you said,
and I think both Minister
and Brooke, you two mentioned in terms of the fact that
we are looking at a long, drawn out pro procurement process,
because sometimes it equipment takes years
and, you know, there is a deficit in terms of productivity
and there are other people who are bidding on it.
What do you see are some of the challenges in terms
of our ability to make that particular bid
and to ensure that we do get the equipment
that is needed is one question.
And also, I guess what I want
to know is we're not gonna get into,
I'm hoping we're not gonna get into a situation
that we're seeing recently in Australia,
whereas they have paid the money,
but in order for them to get the equipment is on a basis
that other countries have spared to give.
If that makes sense. Are we gonna get into that kind of
Situation? I can't see it.
Uh, I, I, three things.
Um, one of the things that's going to help us is the world.
Um, people just turn on their televisions
or read their newspapers,
or in my case, listen to the anxiety of my children,
my adult children, by the way, who have not kind
of seen a world like this in their lifetime.
And they think to themselves,
I think across our entire society that we need to
rebuild and strengthen our defense force
for a variety of challenges.
And I just echo the minister's point about threat.
It doesn't actually have to be a country threat.
It could be a disaster or climate change
or, you know, the fault terrorists.
We have a small defense force
of which a huge amount is asked and,
and we need to equip it,
and its people to be able to deliver
for us and for our benefit.
The second thing is the quality of the spend.
If we, if we get it wrong, if we are seen
to be frittering away money, then it's going
to be much harder to go back to the well
and ask for more, even if the world is saying you need more.
Um, so that's my point.
We need to both, we need to spend, well,
the third thing we have to do is once we've got
capability, we have to use it.
Well, I just see, you know, it's the world, it's the quality
of the spend and it's the quality of the use.
And it, it, we, we will have to do all three of those things
in the life of this plan and thereafter.
And you mentioned the fact that it's not just simply
that the, the thread of war,
and I think everyone has been talking about that,
but also things like, like climate change, natural design,
all of those within the additional 9 billion
and $12 billion altogether.
Is there a proportion that you've imagined of how
that is gonna be balanced in terms,
because a lot of the things that we're looking at in terms
of purchasing is offensive weapon types as opposed to things
that is for natural disasters and et cetera,
and rescue missions, et cetera. Is it, how is
It? I, I would say, because
I, I'm generally don, you know,
I, I, I'd say, if I can two, two things.
The first is, it is a defense force.
It's not a case guard or a, or a johny.
It's, it is actually a military force.
And military forces do have to have combat capability.
So I think that just goes with the territory.
But I can't think of a, of a same size force
that has three services that
has utility across air, sea,
and land at such a high level of quality,
at such a high level of tempo
and such a high level of interoperability with so little.
It is an extraordinary story, it seems to me.
So, uh, I, I don't, myself,
if you actually look at the plan, and,
and there's one point I do kind of take slight issue with,
and it's in the public narrative.
It's not so much the way you posed the question.
If you actually look at the numbers, the amount
of additional money being put towards strike is 100
to 300 million out of 12 billion over the next four years.
We are not going crazily into,
into territory.
It's, it is just part of a balanced portfolio
that one should have with a balanced defense force.
Is, is, would be my answer to your
Question. That's a, that's very
helpful. Thank you, Tim.
Cost, um, minister in the video
that you showed at the start showed the press conference
with yourself and the Prime Minister talking about
that trajectory back to 2% gdp DP spending on defense.
And, and I think from memory,
that was the first time since 1992 that we've been there.
Mm-hmm. That's right. 40
Years. Oh, you're quite right.
So the graphs
Could, could you, could you just talk through what
that trajectory looks like over the next,
'cause it's, it's obviously in the estimates we're looking
at now, but it also goes over the
next four years to get there.
Could you give us an indication of our,
Let's have a look here. There's
the great. Yep. Here it is.
So, um, so here we are.
We've got a picture, fire picture, picture of the camera,
camera come over this way.
It's, it's, it's,
Can we get the on screen?
Just make sure we get
as you walk around camera in the middle should
Come over.
I can hold it and you can, Yeah.
So if we have here, here's your, here's your,
so here we have, this is what's been happening.
So, you know, this is, this is 35 years of Yeah,
the bump in there for the hers and the V eight A.
Mm-hmm. Well, thank goodness we had those.
Otherwise we were down to one her 65 years old,
or 60, something like that.
And um, now it's on super gold card can still be effective
That Age. And
now we, this is, this is where we're moving.
Oh, that's funny. So, I mean, it's a pretty extraordinary
mean, this is quite a slow decline sitting around there.
Then up here. It's quite significant.
And when you add to that, the commitment
to dial in every two years
or even earlier, should there be a problem, uh,
to start increasing that, it's, um, yeah,
it's a pretty significant change.
Yeah. I think the other thing too is the, um, you know,
when you think about it, well, percentage of GDP is,
you know, sort of like relatively arbitrary number.
'cause GDP can go up and down all that.
But it's the commitment to do those things
and to understand that, you know,
if the economy suddenly starts to grow massively,
then you know, get to spend a bit more,
maybe we might get spend a bit more too, but who knows?
We, we will have more money. We can help build the defense
industry here and help them to export.
That's another, another add, um, you know, string
to our bow, isn't it, as a country,
but also the resilience that that brings
to us is very, very important.
So yeah. You know, whether it's like, um,
it's probably enough for that, but it was, it was fun.
Very good.
Sydney, if I wanna have you had feedback, what,
what's the feeling on the ground when people see that kind
of investment coming makes you sailors in your soldiers,
in your, oh, the, they're, they're very buoyed by it.
As I said in my, uh, opening remarks, um,
effectively we are doubling the, uh,
the percentage GDP over the next
seven and a half, eight years.
Um, the secretary
and I have recently been, um, overseas to visit our partners
and go and introduce the DCP to them
and, um, give them some confidence on this.
Um, and they have, we've been very well received in all
of those capitals, particularly the Five Eyes
and some of the nato, uh, members.
Um, I think they're all, uh,
very concerned at the moment about talk since then.
That is around the, you know, 3.5% becoming the, uh,
the standard around the world, um, or higher.
We are working to 2%. And that's a doubling for us.
I think as a small defense force, we can make,
we can make e even the 1% that we're currently on,
we get a lot out of that 1% compared to some
of the bigger countries, if,
if they were on 1%, if you know what I mean.
We're very efficient, very agile, uh, very tailored.
Um, so 2% is certainly gonna be, um, um,
very meaningful to us.
Greg O'Connor.
Thanks. Actually, minister Collins,
you used an interesting stat about World War ii,
say 30% of 30,
30%, 30% of, have
A look at the encyclopedia of New Zealand.
It's quite interesting as I found it there.
And, um, I've even had an OIA about that
where I found it while it's in there,
but it's, um, just Google it, it'll come to you.
I think it's really important. That's, that's what happens.
And, uh, before World War ii,
the defense spending was pretty much like it is now.
It was about 1%.
And then, you know, people like my father who is,
who was a World War II veteran, you know, they, these guys,
they didn't get called up until about 41
because number one, they didn't have any equipment for them
to train with and for that was broomsticks
and, um, instead of guns.
So you're dealing with a nation
that was completely unprepared.
Um, and we don't wanna be in that situation again.
We're hoping never to have another world war.
Um, but one of the ways of not ending up spending 35% is
to start spending 2% as fast as we can.
And as, um, think someone mentioned looking at our papers
and our media today, um,
there is a possibility we could very quickly need to upscale
that to figures
that would make this look like business as usual.
Um, are we, have we got a plan?
I mean, I know it's a very difficult one,
but are, are we looking forward to the, if we had to
scale up at that sort of level, you know, like,
I think thing like, I think a lot of
that expend went into troop ships they had to grab
and, um, all those things they had to, to, to, um,
take within the state.
Are we capable of doing that in the short term
that we might need to, um, given the world, the,
the three biggies that could deteriorate at any time?
Well, I think we're in a better position now
after DCP than we were before.
The point is hopefully, hopefully we will never be in
that position again.
But we also know that hope and pray is not a great strategy.
Um, it's a nice, it's a nice thought.
I think the point is, is that we're only a small nation.
We are, I mean, our population is the same size as Alabama.
And here we have the fourth largest search
and rescuer in the world.
The ninth largest exclusively economic zone.
We're at the bottom of the world.
We right above Antarctica an area
of increasing geopolitical tensions and, um, stresses.
So understand that, you know, we can do what we can do,
but what we will do is if we can sort out this hollowing out
on the personnel, but front
where you can start getting some more capability in there.
'cause right at the moment, you know, it's like if we,
if we were suddenly, um, asked
to spend a lot more in defense than what we are committing
to right now, we could buy some equipment,
but we wouldn't have the right personnel to, to crew them.
And that's one of the problems.
You, you know, we've lost a lot of capability, so we've got
to sensibly build that up.
And I do not want us buying equipment
that sits in the hanger or sits along the dock
'cause we've already got enough of that.
What we need to do is we need to get those personnel sorted.
Absolutely. Alright, well thank you very much, minister.
That, uh, brings us to an end of the,
thank you very much time allocated for defense today.
Appreciate your insights
and to the team as well for your contribution.
Thank you very much. Thank Chief.
Alright, we will continue with the Associate Minister
of Defense capacity Minister Veterans
Who stays with, Um, that'll just allow a moment
for a bit of changeover.
Thank you,
Mr.
Chair. If it's okay, we'll, um, invite the acting head of,
uh, veterans Affairs, Mr.
Alex Bru to join us.
Absolutely. Thank you. Committee.
So we have half an hour set down for this if necessary.
Minister, uh, we welcome your introductory comments
and from the committee. Thank you.
Um, thank, thank you very much, uh, Mr. Chair.
And again, just to acknowledge, um,
and greet the committee, um, to acknowledge, um, chief
of Defense Force, who remains obviously at the, uh,
the table and also Mr.
Brunt as, uh, acknowledged a moment ago.
And I'd be remiss if I didn't add
my acknowledgement to that.
Uh, quite rightly made, uh, by others, um,
in my position earlier,
but also around the table quite rightly about, uh, those
who, uh, currently serve, um, as, uh,
sailors, soldiers and aviators.
But of course, particularly in the context of veterans,
those who weren't served, uh,
but no longer do, uh, I consider that we have a moral
and legal obligation, uh, to, uh, treat them well, um,
to recognize, uh, their service.
Uh, and in the case of the Veteran Support Act
to administer, um, in a reasonable fair
and in particular timely manner of the entitlements, uh,
under that legislation.
Um, I'll keep my remarks really brief
'cause I'm obviously, you know, interested just to, um,
enable the discussion questions that I,
I know will flow from the committees interested
in the subject as this one is.
So thank you for the opportunity.
Wonderful. Thank you very much.
Uh, first question online from Greg O'Connor.
Alright, thanks minister.
Uh, look, j just before we get into detail, I just,
one thing that probably can be clarified,
but, um, if you go to page 43 of the appropriations,
um, the second item down, service costs
veterans entitlements.
Mm-hmm. So we go from, um, 3 billion, some of 3 billion
down to 12 billion.
12 million. And I'm just, um, I'm,
there's probably a logical explanation for it.
I'm sort of, um, stuck at home
and haven't been able to have the, the to, to go
and, um, have this checked out.
But what, what's the explanation for that?
Because it looks like there's a three.
Was there a, an allowance made of 3 billion, presumably?
This is around the War Gardner case.
Uh, good afternoon. Uh,
Bridget Marks the Chief Financial Officer
for the New Zealand Defense Force.
Uh, the, the difference there was a 3.2, uh, billion dollars
that needed to be accounted for.
And you're right in terms of, uh, the fiscal impact
of the legal decision made
by the Veterans Entitlement Appeals Board.
And it relates, um, of course to a claim mate, um,
on behalf of a veteran.
It's a one-off, uh, adjustment that needed
to be made in the, um, 24 25 financial year.
Well, that case is not resolved yet, though, is it?
So how, how were you able to remove that from the books?
It's been, um, it's been added, uh, into the liability
as a result of the decision that was made
by that appeals board.
Do, do, do you mind if I add as well? Sure. Uh, Mr.
Chair, um, in, in, uh, spirit of helpfulness
to Mr. O'Connor, as you rightly, um, acknowledged the,
the matter remains live in the sense that, um, uh,
it remains, uh, before the court.
Um, so obviously for that reason, I'll need to be, um,
circumspect in terms of any comments I make
about the matter itself.
Um, although I should, um, acknowledge
with gratitude the service of, um, the late Tar Gardner, um,
and, and any decisions, um, that are made by the court, um,
would need to meet in, uh,
an appropriate government response in due course.
But in the meantime, the accounting treatment is,
as our colleague and friend has advised, um, that the need
to take account of, uh, what is,
at least on paper at this point, um,
that potential liability
of some 3.2 additional billion, uh, dollars.
Well, well, that's come off now.
So it's, it's now, it is now no longer liability
because it's been removed for this financial year.
This is, this is why I'm a little confused because, oh,
So the, so the liability gets recorded in, um,
in the financial year 24, 25.
So it's now sitting on the balance sheet,
so it gets recorded as an expense in 24, 25,
and now sits on, um, sits on our balance sheet.
So if there was a change, uh, in that decision that
that would be reversed.
So it's now the liability's
now sitting on the balance sheet.
Alright. It's like the, um, the
way the pay parity similar situation.
Yeah. So at, at, at the point that a soldier, sailor,
or aviator is deployed overseas, uh,
a risk assessment is done.
And, and if that is determined to meet the threshold
for qualifying operational service,
a liability is generated.
Uh, and that liability reflects the out year costs
of the support, um, uh, for that, for that veteran and,
and for different cohorts, which we have, uh,
an actuarial model, uh, that we use to predict that, um,
this particular case, uh, has added to that in terms
of the way that we have
to assess the current population cohort of those
who have qualifying operational service.
So when and if, uh, those claims eventuate,
we can draw on that funding
for their treatment and rehabilitation.
It doesn't necessarily mean to say that it will be used.
Uh, and if it's not used, then, then, uh,
as the chief financial officer has
remarked, it gets reversed out.
Alright. So, so that appeal is obviously,
so if the appeal is, is, um, lost
and the status quo remains, then obviously that,
um, li that liability will, will likely be realized?
Yes. At, at the moment we have the liability to be able
to determine veterans' claims within the legislation
that we currently have to operate on, which,
which was a result of the high court decision
and in the decision of the Veterans
Entitlement Appeal Board.
So irrespective of what decision the court come up with,
we are in a position to be able to continue
to support veterans to accept their claims
and for them to receive the treatment
and rehabilitation that they need.
Thank thanks for that clarification.
Yeah, that was, I was pa that's my lack
of accounting ability, but, uh, I couldn't,
I couldn't see it anywhere else.
Yeah. Thank you. And Mr. Chair, can I just add a,
a supplementary answer, if you will, which is just to, um,
point out that the purpose of, um, the exercise in
that legal environment is to provide clarity around, um,
the, the ambit of the Veteran Support Act.
Um, so while obviously, you know,
dollar figures have been discussed in a way that's,
you know, rightly, um, prompted by the members' question,
um, for, from, from a government perspective,
we're interested to know exactly how, uh,
the court would suggest, um, the, um,
obligations under the Veteran Support Act be treated.
And obviously at some point we'll be in a decision, uh,
position to, uh, consider how that relates to the, um,
original purpose of the legislation,
how it's been interpreted, uh, in the interim.
Well, I wonder minister, whether the, if the defense were,
were to be successful with their appeal, um,
whether it might be a good opportunity
to expand the definition of a veteran, um,
and entitlement since, uh, the, uh,
the monies already been put aside for that could be a,
it could, could be a good opportunity for you
as the Veterans Minister,
because I know the pressure that, uh,
you come under from veterans to, uh, ensure that, uh, that,
that the definition is, is, is sorted.
Um, I say that somewhat tongue in cheek,
but, uh, I know that's an area that, um, you as, uh,
as a veteran, um, of, of two, um, two forces,
two nations, um, uh, do take to heart.
And I do acknowledge that, uh, that's something
that I do hear back from, uh, from those I deal with.
Uh, well, thank you. And, and again,
being cautious in relation to the current matter on foot,
I suppose the, the obvious point would be that, um,
government policy needs to reflect, uh, you know, the intent
of Parliament in terms of legislation,
but also, uh, to be mindful of, of the need to process, uh,
claims in a timely fashion.
Uh, and good progress, um,
has been made over the last 18 months in terms of, uh,
bending the curve down in terms of the period of time, uh,
in which veterans applications have been processed and, and
therefore entitlements, um, are received.
And I do credit the work of Veterans Affairs for, um, uh,
bending their systems to adding a, a triage kind of element
to, to receive claims
and to be able to those much more quickly as welling,
as well as gaining, um,
additional funding in the previous budget
over a four year period.
Some, uh, 4 million, uh, dollars additional.
Uh, but also to note that, um, you know, as I say,
we'll need to carefully consider any implications
of a broadening of a scheme given, um, that it's important
that it, that it protects, uh, the entitlements
and the timely delivery of entitlements for those who
who are deemed to have qualifying operational
service in the existing terms.
A supplementary on that. Tim Costley. Thanks, minister.
Um, just with reference to the, uh, Mr. O'Connor suggestion
of changing the definition,
I just noticed some legislation you've introduced
through Parliament, both in terms
of the Veterans recognition bill, the Anzac Day bill, and,
and I just wonder if there's an update on those, uh,
perhaps you've had feedback from veterans around Anzac Day,
and I'd be interested to hear that, but, uh, and, and,
and I guess that the third part of that, just I'll ask
that upfront so you can just speak to it perhaps, would be
around the, um, suggestion of a, a Veteran's Day,
uh, separate to Anzac Day.
And, and obviously we've had the select committees had some
submissions, but, but I just wonder what feedback you've had
and if you can give us an update on
where that, that we can send.
Yeah. Um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak to the committee about that.
And, and I'm grateful for the consideration
of the committee in relation to the Anzac Day, uh,
legislation amendment.
And the idea is there to be much more, um, uh, broad
and expensive in terms of the different, um, historic, uh,
conflicts and operations, um,
and those indeed to the present day and,
and anticipating that in the future, sadly,
it will be the case that we will, uh,
send New Zealanders into harm's way,
but noting of course, that is, um, in many ways, um,
very much the, the, the raise on debt of,
of a defense force, and we've heard a lot mm-hmm.
Um, earlier today about exactly that.
Uh, and so the, uh, idea is to be, um, respectful
of the fact that there are some who have served, um,
including in, in ways that I think would be uncontroversial
to, to note as deserving recognition on 25th of April each
year, um, that are not currently defined in the legislation.
'cause it's quite prescriptive, quite specific.
So I think we can, um, be helpful by amending that
to, to be broader.
Um, as for the Veterans Recognition legislation,
that's a similar kind of idea,
but, um, it's, it's, uh, noting that there are some who, uh,
don't receive services under the Veteran Support Act.
And, and, and in my view, it's right
to maintain the integrity of that system for those
who have qualifying operational service.
So actually, um, just to, um, uh, acknowledge the point
that Mr. O'Connor made, um,
but giving me actually, um, too much credit in my case, I,
I'm, I'm not a veteran in New Zealand terms.
And, and, uh,
and for those who have served for many more years,
for example, than I did, and today's discussion is not about
me, but by way of example, um, I know there are many people
who have served in the Defense Force for a large number
of years who don't get to be considered veterans
because they don't have the particular qualifying
operational service or, or having served pre 1974.
That would mean they have the stasis
of veterans under the New Zealand law in terms
of recognition, which is a much more
intangible and a broader concept.
Um, there are different views actually, about
where we should draw that line.
Uh, overseas jurisdictions, it is, um, uh, uh, you know,
much, much sooner in the process of one attesting as a,
as an officer or an enlisted person with a,
within the defense force that they're consider a veteran.
Um, you know, reasonable arguments can be made
on, on either side of that.
Um, but we are gonna respectfully listen to all the views,
um, that are canvased in that regard.
Um, um, among current serving personnel,
they're probably even a range of review.
So, um, with your permission, Mr.
Chair, I'll just invite the CDF to, um, um,
let us know about any moves in within the organization in
terms of that consultation or, or thinking out
There. Um, thank
you pretty much, Mr.
Um, I, I think it's great that there is going to be a chance
to, to review the definition and have a look at it.
Um, I think with respect to everyone,
there are gonna be many, many different views on this.
Um, people that have served for a short time, people
that have served for a long time, people
that have had multiple, um, deployments overseas,
um, people that have, um, suffered harm, people who haven't.
Um, and, and it's a chance to, to get all those out
and discuss it and, um,
and come up with, with one definition.
Um, I'm aware that within the Defense Force,
there are a number of views on this as well.
Um, I spent having spent 40 years in the,
in the Defense force and had, uh, a number
of overseas deployments myself, uh,
even at the 15 year point in my career,
I didn't consider myself, um, a veteran,
even though I'd had active service in Gulf four.
One, I, to me, a veteran meant, um, someone who has, um, uh,
an amount of experience and exposure to risk and operations
and, and someone that was, it was more about the,
the very etymology of the term veteran.
Um, it, it was a cer it was quite a high bar to cross.
Um, so that was, that was my view 15 years ago.
And having been done more deployments and,
and being in for a few more decades since then, I, I,
I probably still do, do hold that view.
Um, within the Defense Force, at the moment, we are, uh,
we are talking, uh, at all levels.
For instance, um, the Warren officer of the,
of the Defense Force, who is also a member
of the Veterans Advisory Board, um, he's talking to all
of the Warren officers in the Defense force, um,
to canvas cfu, and there's a range there.
So it is gonna be good to have a chance to make sure
that all parts of Defense Force society,
veterans, um, young
and old, um, can finally get a chance to discuss it.
Thank you, Dr. Lauren.
Thank you. Um, thank minister.
I have a question around, uh, actually
around Teki.
I want to know, because I think mental health, particularly
for veterans, is a really important issue
in light of recent events.
I wanna kind of check with you in terms of the progress
of tataki, particularly in light of the fact
that not only has services
and payments to veterans not increased
to inflation in this year's budget, it actually decreased.
So I just wanna check how are we able
to improve on the mental health services as a result of,
you know, that there are outtake framework,
but at the same time we see a reduction.
So there, there's two elements to your, to your question,
to, to answer the latter one first.
Yeah. Uh, the unique situation we find ourself in
New Zealand is that the total population
of veterans is coming down.
Oh, okay. As, as, as the, those cohorts from World War ii,
uh, Korea, um, Vietnam sadly passed away,
that those numbers are coming down.
The interesting complexity is that really since 2000,
the New Zealand Defense Force, um,
uh, deployed significantly.
So, uh, if you think of Bosnia, East Timor, Solomon Islands,
Iraq, and so what that produces for Veterans Affairs
is quite a significant number of, um, of, of,
of veterans presenting with needs.
Yeah. Um, which is what reflects in the backlog.
So, so that while the total expenditure is coming down
because of that population comes down, yeah.
Um, the demand on our services, interestingly, is going up.
Yes. He, the need for otta now, Toyota Tataki is, is the,
the, the strategy that looks to join up,
not just government, but NGOs as well,
because it's important when it comes to supporting veterans
that it's seen as a system.
And so as part of the work, particularly with mental health,
um, that's been done, we completed research
with the Social Wellbeing Agency,
which is now the Social Investment Agency.
And what that enabled us to do was to get quantitative data
outside of the IDI Yeah.
That, that allowed the current, um, uh,
suicide prevention strategy that the Ministry
of Health have just put through to list veterans
as a vulnerable population group for the first time.
Why? Because we now quantitatively know
that people exit service Yeah.
With more impairments than the general population. Yeah.
So we are also working with, um, the Ministry of Health
to have a, an identifier put within the system Yeah.
That allows a veteran when they attend their g for the GP
to automatically know that they're a veteran
and for that billing to come back to, to Veterans Affairs.
Can I just ask one follow up question here, which is,
we also know that there's been significant backlog in terms
of veteran entitlement.
Can I just check in there,
are these services they're being offered
to people while they're waiting for that backlog, as opposed
to they only get the, this entitlement
and access once they have that entitlement?
That's right. That's, but,
but people's mental health don't work in that way.
They don't go like, okay, now I'm identified as a veteran,
officially I'm gonna, I can have a mental health. You know,
So, so after the Veterans Support Act was passed, um,
profess, professor Patterson did a review,
which culminated in the 2020 Amendment Act.
And that amendment ACT's really important
'cause it allows Veterans Affairs to pre-fund
before any Okay, great.
Any diagnosis or anything is made for those that present
with a mental health condition.
Yeah. Um, and
so when a claim also comes into Veterans Affairs,
it doesn't just go down the back, uh, any
with mental health, uh, where a veteran is terminal
or there is significant financial hardship will be processed
immediately within the day,
or certainly within a couple of days, but,
but treatment, yeah.
Will start as soon as, as soon as we know about it. Okay.
Thank you. Alright. Supplementary Laura McClure.
Yeah, thank you. Um, just to build upon that, what kind
of NGOs are you working
with in this space, if you're aware of them?
Um, because obviously we know RA,
but given the the age
of demographics, things are changing.
Um, can you tell me a little bit about who you work
with in the community and who's specifically trained
to help with veterans?
Um, so there, there's a vast array of 'em. Mm-hmm.
Um, there's about 50 or 60 that involved in TA Tuck itself,
um, uh, to, to mention a few.
Obviously the, the, the RSA is a critical component.
Um, we work with, uh, pan Iwi
and Iwi organizations such as UNA or, or
because, uh, there are significant, um, population cohorts
of veterans who are Maori, um, on the East Cape.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and they can better support
and access that community, encourage them to come forward.
We work with the Ran Furley Trust in Auckland, for example.
They help deliver our forums around the country,
which we run five or six forums.
Um, there are a myriad of other NGOs that actively run, um,
uh, services, particularly in terms
of mental health support, not just for veterans,
but actually first responders, so to Kiwi Meyer.
Um, uh, and, and so the list, the list goes on.
Sorry, Colin, did you have
another question? Or was your hands
Yes, yes, I do.
Um, the, there's a large group or,
and well, the estimate of the numbers that are of veterans
who are, who are eligible, who are not registered.
Um, have you done any more work on just how many people
who fit that category?
I know personally, just people who I meet at various
places in my electorate, um, who are ex-service
who clearly do qualify that nobody knows they exist
essentially, um, for these purposes,
any idea how many are out there,
Can, can I give the, um, at least half
of the answer looking forward?
And it may be that there's some information that can be
provided looking backwards.
Um, but of course, it's in the nature of your question,
you've right rightly acknowledged the fact
that there is a gap and,
and it's a, it's a known unknown, I suppose.
Um, but going forward, the good news is that, um,
a combination of the, um, uh,
information sharing agreement across government known
as iso, which is, um, uh, so work that, um,
has been going on for a number of years and certainly long
before my, uh, period of time in this role.
So I do acknowledge, um, those who've been working on it
for a long period of time, both Veterans Affairs and,
and other government agencies and,
and the previous government I know, um,
honorable, uh, previously held that role.
So I do want to, um, acknowledge, um,
him in that regard too.
Um, but, but now we have a system, uh, that we, uh,
have those who qualify
or have qualifying operational service and
therefore will have that designation of veteran, uh,
have the ability to have the details passed directly
to Veterans Affairs so that they don't slip
between the cracks on the day that they walk out
of the Defense force base in civilian
uniform of civilian clothing.
Excuse me. Um, and,
and so we won't have those gaps, um, going forward, um,
on an optout basis, I has to add. Um,
So it'll be an opt, so it'll be an opt out basis. Yeah,
Yeah. Rather opt in,
which has been
Correct. Correct.
And, and,
and the, the work to backfill that is going on now, it's,
you know, underway and it will take some time
because this is the nature of playing catch up.
Um, I dunno if there's anything about the historical element
or indeed the, the current
Situation. Yeah. So to put
some numbers, uh,
and the minister's quite right, I mean, a,
a significant change occurred last year where, uh,
historically a veteran would have
to approach Veterans Affairs, uh,
to access services at the point at which they get
qualifying operational service.
Uh, every month a spreadsheet comes
across to Veterans Affairs.
We know who they are, they get registered,
they get a pin in a certificate.
Now the estimates of those
with qualifying operational service have sat around 45,000,
of which we currently have 20,000 registered with
Veterans Affairs New Zealand,
of which we are currently providing entitlements to 13,000,
which roughly is a breakdown of 6,000 veterans,
5,000 spouses.
Uh, and then there are 3000 receiving the, the, uh,
discretionary Veterans Independence program.
So, um, we additionally have, so, so firstly,
we've got 20,000 known people registered in the system.
Um, we, we are actively getting more names.
We, we have an old HR data set that goes back to 2002,
which we will look
for the ingesting into a client management system
within the next two months.
Now that is going now there will be duplicates, uh,
because of people who have already registered,
but I would expect that 20,000 to jump up to 27,000
or potentially 30,000.
The issue we have is the, the contact details, a lot
of those will be out of date,
but we will be making every effort to, to, to contact them
so that we can register with a pin and certificate.
But at least, uh, there'll be a good cohort of people
who will find when they come knocking,
that will at least know who they are
and they'll already be within the system.
Uh, and that will enable us
to obviously get greater certainty over numbers
into our ears for, uh, financial modeling and,
and, uh, all that sort of stuff.
Thank you. Supplementary. Lauren
Una. Yeah. Thank you so much. Chi.
Just very quickly in terms
of a lot of these changes you're making
and potentially the Sunday uptake you mentioned, right.
In the end, in terms of understanding the financial trend,
but as the budget this year is adequate enough for you
to do the things that you need to do,
Um, as I said,
the liability adjustment from the high court case, uh,
in terms of the way we now have to assess veterans,
that liability gives us sufficient funding Okay.
For all of that veteran cohort.
Additionally, uh, we were
provided the sum of 1.3 million,
that's a departmental uplift for an additional, uh,
Uh, uh, 10 to 13 positions to help us deal
with the implications of how we actually decide
and determine entitlements.
So, um, so that, that is not sufficient to, um,
erase what is a growing backlog,
but it will certainly enable us to, to continue
to reduce the backlog from where it currently was.
Yeah. Very good.
Um, perhaps one more.
We've got time for one more. Um, yes.
Okay. Far away, Just wondering, um,
when the minister will think that, uh, the veterans, uh,
confident that the veterans will be specialty, looked
after, he'll be able to give back the vc, um, to,
uh, Willie AP Piata.
Yeah. Uh, very, very good question. Thank you.
Um, um, I, I won't, um, answer for Mr.
AP Piata or an officer, uh, no less.
Um, but, but I will say
that I've really enjoyed the opportunity to interact
with him on, um, on a COPA that I know is very important
to him and, and many others.
And so he, um, has, um, rightly, um, carried the flame
for those who, um, want
to initiate a conversation about ways
that we can better recognize our veterans, um, in terms of,
um, when his, um, uh, medal, that particular medal, um,
might be returned physically.
That will be a matter of negotiation, no doubt as
to logistics and in in general sense for appropriateness,
um, as, um, he and I determine between us, I suppose.
But certainly I'm looking forward
to a few different opportunities, uh, including
around the veterans recognition legislation
and also the, the veterans, um, uh, day of, of recognition,
whatever that might officially be named
and whenever it might take place.
Um, and if I can just, um,
wrap up one further comment in relation to the question
by Ms. McClure is, is is that with various NGOs
and individuals who do great work to support our veterans,
whether or not they themselves have served, um, I think
that will be a great opportunity to shine a, a light on some
of that amazing work that is done.
Mm. Um, because that will be ultimately to the benefit
of our ex-service personnel, uh, community to do that.
So, um, that will be a valuable opportunity
and, um, I hope that, um, Warren, officer Piata as well
as every member of this committee, um, will, um,
be available to, um, join in what I think will be, um, a,
a really meaningful location for all concern.
Excellent. Thank you. Minister. It
Sounds like there might be about 7,000 more, um,
potentially 7,000 more in the next 12 months.
Um, veterans, if the, uh, if, if the, uh,
scheme is successful,
We'll have to book a bigger room, I think is
what you're saying, but you'll, you'll be
By the most committees, very keen
to support any work we can there of course,
considering the amendment bill at the moment,
but programs that work That's right.
And just want to acknowledge our respect, need,
and thanks for those that have served
or those that are currently getting support
and indeed those that aren't, I would encourage them
to seek support if they're eligible for that.
Um, thank them for the service.
Thank you very much for your time today. Thank.